<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Grace, Actual and Habitual</title>
      <author><name reg="Pohle, Joseph">Joseph Pohle</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="3">Edition 3</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>July 29, 2009</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">29540</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2008-07-29">July 29,  2008</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Suzanne Lybarger, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously
            made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Grace</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Actual and Habitual</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">A Dogmatic Treatise</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Rt. Rev. Msgr. Joseph Pohle, Ph.D., D.D.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Formerly Professor of Dogmatic Theology at St. Joseph's Seminary, Leeds (England), Later Professor of Fundamental Theology at The Catholic University of America</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Adapted and Edited by</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Arthur Preuss</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Third, Revised Edition</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">W. E. Blake &amp; Son, Limited</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Catholic Church Supplies</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">123 Church St.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Toronto, Canada</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1919</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='i'/><anchor id='Pgi'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Imprimatur</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>NIHIL OBSTAT</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Sti. Ludovici, die 18 Jan. 1919</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>F. G. Holweck,<lb/>
Censor Librorum</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>IMPRIMATUR</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Sti. Ludovici, die 21 Jan. 1919</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Joannes J. Glennon<lb/>
Archiepiscopus<lb/>
Sti. Ludovici</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Copyright, 1914<lb/>
by<lb/>
Joseph Gummersbach</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>All rights reserved</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Printed in U. S. A.</hi>
</p>

<p>
BECKTOLD<lb/>
PRINTING &amp; BOOK MFG. CO.<lb/>
ST. LOUIS. U. S. A.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Introduction</head>

<p>
Humanity was reconciled to God by the Redemption.
This does not, however, mean that
every individual human being was forthwith justified,
for individual justification is wrought by
the application to the soul of grace derived from
the inexhaustible merits of Jesus Christ.
</p>

<p>
There are two kinds of grace: (1) actual and
(2) habitual. Actual grace is a supernatural
gift by which rational creatures are enabled to
perform salutary acts. Habitual, or, as it is commonly
called, sanctifying, grace is a habit, or
more or less enduring state, which renders men
pleasing to God.
</p>

<p>
This distinction is of comparatively recent date,
but it furnishes an excellent principle of division
for a dogmatic treatise on grace.<note place='foot'>The Fathers and the Schoolmen
<q>do not emphasize the difference,
and frequently speak of habitual
and actual grace as of one whole.
Controversial reasons account for
this discrepancy, which readers of
the older theologians should constantly
bear in mind.</q> (Wilhelm-Scannell,
<hi rend='italic'>Manual of Catholic Theology</hi>,
Vol. II, p. 229, 2nd ed., London
1901.)
</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part I. Actual Grace</head>

<p>
Actual grace is a transient supernatural help
given by God from the treasury of the merits of
Jesus Christ for the purpose of enabling man to
work out his eternal salvation.
</p>

<p>
We shall consider: (1) The Nature of Actual
Grace; (2) Its Properties, and (3) Its Relation
to Free-Will.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>General Readings</hi>:&mdash;St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theologica</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 109-114, and the commentators, especially Billuart,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi> (ed. Lequette, t. III); the Salmanticenses,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Dei</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Cursus Theologiae</hi>, Vol. IX
sqq., Paris 1870); Thomas de Lemos, <hi rend='italic'>Panoplia Divinae Gratiae</hi>,
Liège 1676; Dominicus Soto, <hi rend='italic'>De Natura et Gratia</hi>, l. III, Venice
1560; *Ripalda,<note place='foot'>The asterisk before an author's name indicates that his
treatment of the subject is especially clear and thorough. As St. Thomas is invariably
the best guide, the omission of the asterisk before his name never means
that we consider his work inferior to that of other writers. There are
vast stretches of theology which he scarcely touched.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernaturali</hi>, 3 vols. (I, Bordeaux 1634;
II, Lyons 1645; III, Cologne 1648).
</p>

<p>
*C. v. Schäzler, <hi rend='italic'>Natur und Übernatur: Das Dogma von der
Gnade</hi>, Mainz 1865; <hi rend='smallcaps'>Idem</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Neue
Untersuchungen über das Dogma von der Gnade</hi>, Mainz 1867; *J. E. Kuhn,
<hi rend='italic'>Die christliche Lehre von der göttlichen Gnade</hi>, Tübingen 1868;
Jos. Kleutgen, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>Theologie der Vorseit</hi>, Vol. II, 2nd ed.,
pp. 152 sqq., Münster 1872; R. Cercià, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Christi</hi>, 3 vols.,
Paris 1879; *C. Mazzella, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Christi</hi>, 4th ed., Rome
1895; *J. H. Oswald, <hi rend='italic'>Die Lehre von der Heiligung, d. i. Gnade,
Rechtfertigung, Gnadenwahl</hi>, 3rd ed., Paderborn 1885; *D. Palmieri, S. J.,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>, Gulpen 1885; *Heinrich-Gutberlet,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII, Mainz 1897; *S. Schiffini,
S. J., <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, Freiburg 1901; G. Lahousse, S. J.,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, Louvain
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
1902; Chr. Pesch, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>Praelectiones Dogmaticae</hi>, Vol. V, 3rd
ed., Freiburg 1908; G. van Noort, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Christi</hi>, Amsterdam
1908; E. J. Wirth, <hi rend='italic'>Divine Grace</hi>, New York 1903; S. J. Hunter,
S. J., <hi rend='italic'>Outlines of Dogmatic Theology</hi>, Vol. III, pp. 1 sqq.;
Wilhelm-Scannell, <hi rend='italic'>A Manual of Catholic Theology</hi>, Vol. II, 2nd ed.,
pp. 227 sqq., London 1901; A. Devine, <hi rend='italic'>The Sacraments Explained</hi>,
3rd ed. pp. 1-43, London 1905.&mdash;L. Labauche, S. S., <hi rend='italic'>God
and Man, Lectures on Dogmatic Theology II</hi>, pp. 123 sqq., New York
1916.&mdash;J. E. Nieremberg, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>The Marvels of Divine
Grace</hi>, tr. by Lady Lovat, London 1917.
</p>

<p>
On the teaching of the Fathers cfr. Isaac Habert, <hi rend='italic'>Theologiae
Græcorum Patrum Vindicatae circa Universam Materiam Gratiae
Libri III</hi>, Paris 1646; E. Scholz, <hi rend='italic'>Die Lehre des hl. Basilius von
der Gnade</hi>, Freiburg 1881; Hümmer, <hi rend='italic'>Des hl. Gregor von Nazianz
Lehre von der Gnade</hi>, Kempten 1890; E. Weigl, <hi rend='italic'>Die Heilslehre
des hl. Cyrill von Alexandrien</hi>, Mainz 1905.
</p>
</quote>

<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. The Nature Of Actual Grace</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section 1. Definition Of Actual Grace</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>General Notion of Grace.</hi>&mdash;The best way
to arrive at a correct definition of actual grace is
by the synthetic method. We therefore begin
with the general notion of grace.
</p>

<p>
Like <q>nature,</q><note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God the
Author of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 181 sqq., St. Louis 1912.</note> grace
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia</foreign>, χάρις) is a word
of wide reach, used in a great variety of senses.
Habert<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecorum Patrum
Vindicatae circa Universam Materiam
Gratiae Libri III</hi>, I, 4, Paris
1646.</note> enumerates no less than fourteen;
which, however, may be reduced to four.
</p>

<p>
a) Subjectively, grace signifies good will or
benevolence shown by a superior to an inferior, as
when a criminal is pardoned by the king's grace.
</p>

<p>
b) Objectively, it designates a favor inspired
by good will or benevolence. In this sense the
term may be applied to any free and gratuitous
gift (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>donum gratis datum</foreign>),
as when a king bestows graces on his lieges.
</p>

<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>

<p>
c) Grace may also mean personal charm or attractiveness.
In this sense the term frequently
occurs in Latin and Greek literature (the Three
Graces). Charm elicits love and prompts a person
to the bestowal of favors.
</p>

<p>
d) The recipient of gifts or favors usually
feels gratitude towards the giver, which he expresses
in the form of thanks. Hence the word
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratiae</foreign>
(plural) frequently stands for thanksgiving
(<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratias agere</foreign>,</q>
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deo gratias</foreign>,</q> <q>to say
grace after meals</q>).<note place='foot'><q>The same name is loosely applied
to the act of <q>blessing</q> the
food before taking it, which is
properly the function of a priest,
but which is suitably performed by
every Christian.</q> (Hunter, <hi rend='italic'>Outlines
of Dogmatic Theology</hi>, Vol.
III, p. 6.) Cfr. S. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theologica</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 110, art.
1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Secundum communem loquendi
modum tripliciter gratia accipi
consuevit: uno modo pro dilectione
alicuius...; secundo sumitur pro
aliquo dono gratis dato...; tertio
modo sumitur pro recompensatione
beneficii gratis dati, secundum
quod dicimur agere gratias beneficiorum.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
The first and fundamental of these meanings
is <q>a free gift or favor.</q> The benevolence of
the giver and the attractiveness of the recipient
are merely the reasons for which the gift is imparted,
whereas the expression of thanks is an
effect following its bestowal.
</p>

<p>
Dogmatic theology is concerned exclusively
with grace in the fundamental sense of the term.
</p>

<p>
e) Grace is called a gift (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>donum</foreign>, δωρεά),
because it is owing to free benevolence, not required by justice. It is
called gratuitous (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratis datum</foreign>),
because it is bestowed
without any corresponding merit on the part of the creature.
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
A gift may be due to the recipient as a matter of
distributive or commutative justice, and in that case it
would not be absolutely gratuitous (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratis</foreign>).
Grace, on the contrary, is bestowed out of pure benevolence, from no
other motive than sheer love. This is manifestly St.
Paul's idea when he writes: <q>And if by grace, it is not
now by works: otherwise grace is no more grace.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. XI, 6:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si autem gratia,
iam non ex operibus; alioquin gratia
iam non est gratia.</foreign></q></note> It is
likewise the meaning of St. Augustine when he says, in his
Homilies on the Gospel of St. John, that grace is <q>something
gratuitously given ... as a present, not in return
for something else.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Tract. in Ioannem</hi>,
III, n. 9: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quid est gratia? Gratis data.
Quid est gratis data? Donata, non
reddita.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Natural and Supernatural Grace.</hi>&mdash;Grace
is not necessarily supernatural. Sacred
Scripture and the Fathers sometimes apply the
word to purely natural gifts. We petition God
for our daily bread, for good health, fair weather
and other temporal favors, and we thank Him
for preserving us from pestilence, famine, and
war, although these are blessings which do not
transcend the order of nature.<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Debitum
naturae.</foreign></note>
</p>

<p>
a) Our petitions for purely natural favors are inspired
by the conviction that creation itself, and everything connected
therewith, is a gratuitous gift of God. This conviction
is well founded. God was under no necessity of
creating anything: creation was an act of His free-will.
Again, many of the favors to which human nature, as
such, has a claim, are free gifts when conferred upon the
individual. Good health, fortitude, talent, etc., are natural
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
graces, for which we are allowed, nay obliged, to petition
God. The Pelagians employed this truth to conceal a pernicious
error when they unctuously descanted on the
magnitude and necessity of grace as manifested in creation.
It was by such trickery that their leader succeeded in
persuading the bishops assembled at the Council of Diospolis
or Lydda (A. D. 415) that his teaching was quite orthodox.
St. Augustine and four other African bishops
later reported to Pope Innocent I, that if these prelates
had perceived that Pelagius meant to deny that grace by
which we are Christians and sons of God, they would not
have listened to him so patiently, and that, consequently,
no blame attached to these judges because they simply
took the term <q>grace</q> in its ecclesiastical
sense.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epistula ad Innocent.</hi>, n. 2:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nam si intellexissent illi episcopi,
eam illum dicere gratiam, quam
etiam cum impiis habemus, cum quibus
homines sumus, negare vero
eam quâ Christiani et filii Dei
sumus, quis eum patienter ... ante
oculos suos ferret? Quapropter
non culpandi sunt iudices, qui ecclesiasticâ
consuetudine nomen gratiae</foreign>
[<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>christianae] audierunt.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
b) Generally speaking, however, the term
<q>grace</q> is reserved for what are commonly
called the supernatural gifts of God, the merely
preternatural as well as the strictly supernatural.<note place='foot'>On
the difference between these
two categories see Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God the Author of Nature and the
Supernatural</hi>, pp. 180 sqq.</note>
In this sense "grace" is as sharply opposed to
purely natural favors as nature is opposed to the
supernatural.
</p>

<p>
The importance of the distinction between supernatural
and purely natural grace will appear from an analysis of
the concept itself. Considered as gifts of God, the strictly
supernatural graces (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, justification, divine sonship, the
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
beatific vision) ontologically exceed the bounds of nature.
Considered as purely gratuitous favors, they are negatively
and positively undeserved. The grace involved in creation,
for instance, is not conferred on some existing beneficiary,
but actually produces its recipient. The creation
itself, therefore, being entirely <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratis data</foreign>,
all that succeeds it, supernatural grace included, must be negatively
undeserved, in as far as it was not necessary for the recipient
to exist at all. But the supernatural graces are
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>indebitae</foreign>
also positively, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> positing the creation, because
they transcend every creatural claim and power. Both
elements are contained in the above-quoted letter of the
African bishops to Pope Innocent I: <q>Though it may be
said in a certain legitimate sense, that we were created by
the grace of God, ... that is a different grace by which
we are called predestined, by which we are justified, and
by which we receive eternal beatitude.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epist.
ad Innocent.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Etsi
quâdam non improbandâ ratione dicitur
gratia Dei quâ creati sumus
[gratia naturalis], ... alia est
tamen, quâ praedestinati vocamur,
iustificamur, glorificamur [gratia
supernaturalis].</foreign></q></note> Of this last-mentioned
grace (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> grace in the strictly supernatural
sense), St. Augustine says: <q>This, the grace which Catholic
bishops are wont to read in the books of God and
preach to their people, and the grace which the Apostle
commends, is not that by which we are created as men, but
that by which as sinful men we are
justified.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epist. ad Sixt.</hi>, 194, n. 8:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Haec est enim gratia, quam in
libris Dei legere et populis praedicare
catholici antistites consueverunt, et
gratia quam commendat Apostolus
non est ea quâ creati sumus, ut
homines essemus, sed quâ iustificati
sumus, quum mali homines essemus.</foreign></q></note> In other
words, natural is opposed to supernatural grace in the
same way that nature is opposed to the supernatural.
<q>[To believe] is the work of grace, not of nature. It is, I
say, the work of grace, which the second Adam brought us,
not of nature, which Adam wholly lost in himself.</q><note place='foot'>St. Augustine,
<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>, 217: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hoc
[scil. credere] opus est gratiae, non
naturae. Opus est, inquam, gratiae
quam nobis attulit secundus Adam,
non naturae quam totam perdidit in
seipso Adam.</foreign></q></note>
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
Adding the new note obtained by this analysis we arrive at
the following definition: Grace is a gratuitous <emph>super-natural</emph>
gift.<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia est donum gratis datum
supernaturale.</foreign></note>
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Grace of God and the Grace of
Christ.</hi>&mdash;Though all supernatural graces are
from God, a distinction is made between the
<q>grace of God</q> and the <q>grace of Christ.</q> The
difference between them is purely accidental,
based on the fact that the <q>grace of Christ</q> flows
exclusively from the merits of the atonement.
</p>

<p>
a) The following points may serve as criteria to distinguish
the two notions:
</p>

<p>
A) The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia Dei</foreign>
springs from divine benevolence and
presupposes a recipient who is unworthy merely in a negative
sense (=not worthy, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non dignus</foreign>),
whereas the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
Christi</foreign> flows from mercy and benevolence and is conferred
on a recipient who is positively unworthy
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>indignus</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
B) The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia Dei</foreign>
elevates the soul to the supernatural order
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia elevans</foreign>), while the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia Christi</foreign> heals the
wounds inflicted by sin, especially concupiscence
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
elevans simul et sanans</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
C) The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia Dei</foreign> is a gratuitous gift
conferred by the Blessed Trinity without regard to the theandric merits of
Jesus Christ, whereas the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia Christi</foreign> is
based entirely on those merits.
</p>

<p>
b) The Scotists hold that the distinction between <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
Dei</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia Christi</foreign> is purely
logical. They regard
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
the God-man as the predestined centre of the universe
and the source of all graces.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>Soteriology.
A Dogmatic Treatise on the Redemption</hi>,
pp. 24 sqq., St. Louis 1914.</note> The Thomists, on the
other hand, regard the grace of the angels, and that
wherewith our first parents were endowed in Paradise,
purely as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia Dei</foreign>;
they hold that the merits of Christ
did not become operative until after the Fall, and that,
consequently, there is a real distinction between the grace
of the angels and that of our first parents on the one
hand, and the grace of Christ on the other.
</p>

<p>
As it cannot reasonably be supposed that the angels
are endowed with specifically the same graces by which
mankind was redeemed from sin, the Scotists are forced
to admit a distinction between the grace of Christ as God-man
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia Christi Dei-hominis</foreign>)
and the grace of Christ as Redeemer
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia Christi Redemptoris</foreign>), so that even
according to them, the dogmatic treatise on Grace is concerned
solely with the grace of Christ <hi rend='italic'>qua</hi> Redeemer.
</p>

<p>
Hence, grace must be more particularly defined as a gratuitous
supernatural gift <emph>derived from the merits of Jesus
Christ</emph>.<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia est donum
gratis datum, supernaturale, ex meritis Christi.</foreign></note>
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='smallcaps'>External and Internal Grace.</hi>&mdash;External
grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia externa</foreign>) comprises all those
strictly supernatural institutions which stimulate
pious thoughts and salutary resolutions in the
human soul. Such are, for example, Holy Scripture,
the Church, the Sacraments, the example of Jesus Christ, etc.
Internal grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia interna</foreign>)
inheres or operates invisibly in the soul,
and places it in relation with God as its supernatural
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
end. Internal graces are, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, the theological
virtues, the power of forgiving sins, etc. The
Pelagians admitted external, but obstinately denied
internal grace.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>Contra Duas
Epistolas Pelagianorum</hi>, IV, 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Paul<note place='foot'>Cfr. Rom. III, 21 sqq.; Gal.
II, 16.</note> emphasizes the distinction between external
and internal grace by designating the former as <q>law</q>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lex</foreign>, νόμος)
and the latter as <q>faith</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides</foreign>, πίστις).
With one exception, (<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>, the Hypostatic Union, which
is the climax of all graces), external is inferior to,
because a mere preparation for, internal grace, which
aims at sanctification. We are concerned in this treatise
solely with internal grace. Hence, proceeding a step
further, we may define grace as a gratuitous, supernatural,
<emph>internal</emph> gift of God, derived from the merits of Jesus
Christ.<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia est donum gratis datum,
supernaturale, internum, ex meritis
Christi.</foreign></note>
</p>

<p>
5. <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Gratia Gratis Data</hi></q> and <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Gratia
Gratum Faciens</hi>.</q>&mdash;The supernatural grace of
Christ, existing invisibly in the soul either as a transient impulse
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actus</foreign>) or as a permanent state
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus</foreign>), tends either to the salvation of the
person in whom it inheres or through him to
the sanctification of others. In the former case it is called ingratiating
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia gratum faciens</foreign>),
in the latter, gratuitously given (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia gratis
data</foreign>). The term <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia gratis data</foreign>
is based on the words of our Lord recorded in the Gospel of
St. Matthew: <q>Heal the sick, raise the dead,
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
cleanse the lepers, cast out devils: freely have you
received, freely give.</q><note place='foot'>St. Matthew X, 8:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Infirmos
curate, mortuos suscitate, leprosos
mundate, daemones eiicite: gratis
accepistis, gratis date</foreign> (δωρεὰν
δότε).</q>&mdash;The name <q>gratuitously
given,</q> as Fr. Hunter observes (<hi rend='italic'>Outlines</hi>,
III, 10), is <q>tautological and
not particularly expressive,</q> and
<q>helps in no way to indicate what
is the nature of the graces which
it is intended to exclude. These are
such as, for want of a better word,
we call ingratiating: the Latin name
used by theologians (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratum faciens</foreign>)
denotes that they make a man
pleasing to God, grateful to Him, if
we understand <emph>grateful</emph> of that
which gives pleasure, and not in
its commoner sense, which is nearly
the same as thankful.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
a) The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia gratum faciens</foreign> is intended for
all men without exception; the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia gratis
data</foreign> only for a few
specially chosen persons. To the class of gratuitously bestowed
graces belong the charismata of the prophets and
the ordinary powers of the priesthood.<note place='foot'>For a list of the charismata see
1 Cor. XII, 4 sqq. Cfr. Englmann,
<hi rend='italic'>Von den Charismen im allgemeinen
und von dem Sprachencharisma im
besonderen</hi>, Ratisbon 1848; Cornely,
<hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S. Pauli Priorem
Epistolam ad Corinthios</hi>, pp. 410
sqq., Paris 1890; Chr. Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelect.
Dogmat.</hi>, Vol. V, 3rd ed., pp.
243 sqq., Freiburg 1908.</note>
</p>

<p>
Each of these two species of internal grace may exist
independently of the other because personal holiness is
not a necessary prerequisite for the exercise of the charismata
or the power of forgiving sins, etc.
</p>

<p>
b) Considered with regard to its intrinsic worth, the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia gratum faciens</foreign>
is decidedly superior to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
gratis data</foreign>. St. Paul, after enumerating all the charismata,
admonishes the Corinthians: <q>Be zealous for the
better gifts, and I show unto you yet a more excellent
way,</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. XII, 31: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Aemulamini
autem charismata meliora, et adhuc
excellentiorem viam vobis demonstro.</foreign></q></note>
and then sings the praises of
charity:<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Caritas</foreign>,
ἀγάπη.</note> <q>If I
speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have
not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling
cymbal. And if I should have prophecy and should know
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
all the mysteries, and all knowledge, and if I should have
all faith, so that I could remove mountains, I am nothing,
etc.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. XIII, 1 sqq. Cfr. St.
Thomas Aquinas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>, 1a
2ae, qu. 111, art. 5: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unaquaeque
virtus tanto excellentior est, quanto
ad altius bonum ordinatur. Semper
autem finis potior est his, quae sunt
ad finem [i.e. media]. Gratia autem
gratum faciens ordinat hominem
immediate ad coniunctionem ultimi
finis; gratiae autem gratis datae ordinant
hominem ad quaedam praeparatoria
finis ultimi, sicut per
prophetiam et miracula et huiusmodi
homines inducuntur ad hoc
quod ultimo fini coniungantur. Et
ideo gratia gratum faciens est multo excellentior quam gratia gratis
data.</foreign></q></note>
Charity is a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia gratum faciens</foreign>. Hence,
since the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia gratis data</foreign> is treated
elsewhere (Apologetics,
Mystic and Sacramental Theology), we must add another
note to our definition: Grace is a gratuitous, supernatural,
internal gift, derived from the merits of Jesus
Christ, <emph>by which man is rendered pleasing in the sight of
God</emph>.<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia est donum gratis
datum, supernaturale, internum, gratum
faciens, ex meritis Christi.</foreign></note>
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Actual and Habitual Grace.</hi>&mdash;The
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
gratum faciens</foreign> is given either for the performance
of a supernatural act or for the production
of a permanent supernatural state (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus</foreign>).
In the latter case it is called habitual, or, as it sanctifies
the creature in the eyes of God, sanctifying
grace.
</p>

<p>
Actual grace comprises two essential elements: (1)
divine help as the principle of every salutary supernatural
act, and (2) the salutary act itself. Hence its designation
by the Fathers as Θεοῦ ἐνέργεια, ἡ τοῦ Λόγου χείρ, θεία κίνησις,
or, in Latin, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dei auxilium, subsidium, adiutorium, motio
divina</foreign>,&mdash;all of which appellations have been adopted by
the Schoolmen. Actual grace invariably tends either to
produce habitual or sanctifying grace, or to preserve and
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
increase it where it already exists. It follows that, being
merely a means to an end, actual grace is inferior to
sanctifying grace, which is that end itself.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Actual grace may therefore be defined as an
unmerited, supernatural, internal divine help,
based on the merits of Jesus Christ, which renders
man pleasing in the sight of God, enabling
him to perform salutary acts; or, somewhat
more succinctly, as a supernatural help bestowed
for the performance of salutary acts, in consideration
of the merits of Jesus Christ.
</quote>

<p>
Actual grace is (1) a <emph>help</emph>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>auxilium</foreign>), because it
consists in a transient influence exercised by God on
the soul. (2) A <emph>supernatural</emph> help, to distinguish it from
God's ordinary providence and all such merely natural
graces as man would probably have received in the state
of pure nature.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God the Author of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 229 sq.</note> (3) It is attributed to the merits of
Jesus Christ, in order to indicate that the graces granted
to fallen man are all derived from the atonement both
as their efficient and their meritorious cause. (4) Actual
grace is said to be given for the performance of
salutary acts to show that its immediate purpose or end is
an act, not a state, and that the acts for which it is given
must be in the order of salvation.
</p>

<p>
7. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Twofold Causality of Actual
Grace.</hi>&mdash;If grace is a supernatural help, mere
nature cannot, of its own strength, perform salutary
acts. Consequently, actual grace exercises a
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
causal influence without which man would be helpless
in the matter of salvation.
</p>

<p>
The causality of actual grace is both moral and
physical.
</p>

<p>
a) As a moral cause grace removes the obstacles
which render the work of salvation
difficult. Besides this negative it also has a positive
effect: it inspires delight in virtue and hatred
of sin.
</p>

<p>
This mode of operation manifestly presupposes a certain
weakness of the human will, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
<emph>concupiscence</emph>,
which is an effect of original sin. Actual grace exercises
a healing influence on the will<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
pp. 298 sq.</note> and is therefore called
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia sanans sive medicinalis</foreign>.
<q>Unless something is put before the soul to please and attract it,</q> says St.
Augustine, <q>the will can in no wise be moved; but it is not
in man's power to bring this about.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep. ad
Simplician.</hi>, I, 9, 22: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Voluntas ipsa,
nisi aliquid occurrerit quod delectet et invitet animum,
moveri nullo modo potest; hoc autem, ut occurrat, non est in hominis
potestate.</foreign></q></note> Concretely, this
moral causality of grace manifests itself as a divinely inspired
joy in virtue and a hatred of sin, both of which
incline the will to the free performance of salutary acts.
These sentiments may in some cases be so strong
as to deprive the will temporarily of its freedom
to resist. The sudden conversion of St. Paul is a
case in point. Holy Scripture expressly assures us that
God is the absolute master of the human will and, if He
so chooses, can bend it under His yoke without using
physical force. Cfr. Prov. XXI, 1: <q>The heart of the
king is in the hand of the Lord: whithersoever he will,
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
he shall turn it.</q> <q>Who will be so foolish as to say,</q>
queries St. Augustine, <q>that God cannot change the evil
wills of men, whichever, whenever, and wheresoever He
chooses, and direct them to what is
good?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>, c. 98:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quis tam
impie desipiat, ut dicat, Deum malas
hominum voluntates, quas voluerit,
quando voluerit, ubi voluerit, in
bonum non posse convertere?</foreign></q></note> It is but
rarely, of course, that God grants to any man a summary
victory over his sinful nature; but this fact does not prevent
the Church from praying: <q>Vouchsafe, O Lord, to
compel our wills to thee, even though they be
rebellious.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Domine, ... ad
te nostras etiam rebelles compelle propitius
voluntates.</foreign></q> For a full treatment
of God's moral causality the student
is referred to Ripalda, <hi rend='italic'>De Ente
Supernaturali</hi>, disp. 109, sect. 2 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) Even more important than the moral
causality of grace is its physical causality. Man
depends entirely on God for the physical strength
necessary to perform salutary works. Grace elevates
the faculties of the soul to the supernatural
sphere, thereby enabling it to perform supernatural
acts.
</p>

<p>
Physical is as distinct from moral causality in the order
of grace as in the order of nature. The holding out of
a beautiful toy will not enable a child to walk without
support from its elders. Moral causality is insufficient to
enable a man to perform salutary acts. Grace (as we
shall show later) is absolutely, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> metaphysically, necessary
for all salutary acts, whether easy or difficult, and
hence the incapacity of nature cannot be ascribed solely
to weakness and to the moral difficulty resulting from sin,
but must be attributed mainly to physical impotence. A
bird without wings is not merely impeded but utterly unable
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
to fly; similarly, man without grace is not only handicapped
but absolutely incapacitated for the work of salvation.
Considered under this aspect, actual grace is
called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia elevans</foreign>, because it elevates
man to the supernatural state.<note place='foot'>Cfr. D. Palmieri,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>, thes. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
This double causality of grace is well brought
out in Perrone's classic definition: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia
actualis est gratuitum illud auxilium,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Causa formalis.</foreign></note> quod
Deus<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Causa
efficiens.</foreign></note> per Christi merita<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Causa meritoria.</foreign></note> homini
lapso<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Causa
materialis.</foreign></note> largitur, tum ut eius infirmitati
consulat,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Causalitas
moralis.</foreign></note> ... tum ut eum erigat ad statum supernaturalem
atque idoneum faciat ad actus supernaturales
eliciendos,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Causalitas
physica.</foreign></note> ut iustificationem possit
adipisci<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Causa finalis
inadaequata.</foreign></note> in eaque iam consecuta perseverare, donec perveniat ad
vitam aeternam.</foreign></q><note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Causa
finalis adaequata.</foreign></note> In English: <q>Actual grace is
that unmerited interior assistance which God, by
virtue of the merits of Christ, confers upon fallen
man, in order, on the one hand, to remedy his
infirmity resulting from sin and, on the other, to
raise him to the supernatural order and thereby
to render him capable of performing supernatural
acts, so that he may attain justification, persevere
in it to the end, and thus enter into everlasting
life.</q> This definition is strictly scientific, for it
enumerates all the elements that enter into the
essence of actual grace.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section 2. Division Of Actual Grace</head>

<p>
Actual grace may be divided according to: (1) the difference
existing between the faculties of the human soul,
and (2) in reference to the freedom of the will.
</p>

<p>
Considered in its relation to the different faculties of
the soul, actual grace is either of the intellect, or of the
will, or of the sensitive faculties. With regard to the free
consent of the will, it is either (1) prevenient, also called
coöperating, or (2) efficacious or merely sufficient.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_I_Section_2_No_1'/>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Illuminating Grace of the Intellect.</hi>&mdash;Actual
grace, in so far as it inspires salutary
thoughts, is called illuminating (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia illuminationis
s. illustrationis</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
This illumination of the intellect by grace may be either
mediate or immediate. It is mediate if grace suggests
salutary thoughts to the intellect by purely natural means,
or external graces, such as a stirring sermon, the perusal
of a good book, etc.; it is immediate when the Holy Ghost
elevates the powers of the soul, and through the instrumentality
of the so-called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentia
obedientialis</foreign>,<note place='foot'>On the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentia obedientialis</foreign> see
Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God the Author of
Nature and the Supernatural</hi>, pp.
188 sqq.</note> produces
in it entitatively supernatural acts.
</p>

<p>
The existence of the grace of immediate illumination
follows from its absolute necessity as a means of salvation,
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
defined by the Second Council of Orange, A. D.
529.<note place='foot'>Can. 7, quoted by Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 180.</note>
</p>

<p>
a) The grace of mediate illumination may be
inferred aprioristically from the existence of a divine
revelation equipped with such supernatural
institutions as the Bible, the sacraments, rites,
ceremonies, etc. In conformity with the psychological
laws governing the association of ideas, intelligent
meditation on the agencies comprised under
the term <q>external grace</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi>,
<ref target='Pg011'>p. 11</ref>.</note> elicits in the mind
salutary thoughts, which are not necessarily supernatural
in their inception.
</p>

<p>
It is not unlikely that Sacred Scripture refers to such
graces as these when it recommends <q>the law of God</q>
or <q>the example of Christ</q> as fit subjects for meditation.
Cfr. Ps. XVIII, 8 sq.: <q>The law of the Lord is unspotted,
converting souls, ... the commandment of the
Lord is lightsome, enlightening the eyes.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Lex Domini immaculata, convertens
animas, ... praeceptum Domini
lucidum, illuminans oculos.</foreign></q></note> 1 Pet. II, 21:
<q>Christ also suffered for us, leaving you an example that
you should follow his steps.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Christus passus est pro nobis,
vobis relinquens exemplum, ut sequamini
vestigia eius.</foreign></q></note> St. Augustine probably
had in mind the grace of mediate illumination when he
wrote: <q>God acts upon us by the incentives of visible
objects to will and to believe, either externally by evangelical
exhortations, ... or internally, as no man has
control over what enters into his thoughts.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Spiritu et Litera</hi>, c. 34:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Visorum suasionibus agit Deus, ut
velimus et ut credamus, sive extrinsecus
per evangelicas exhortationes
sive intrinsecus, ubi nemo habet in
potestate, quid ei veniat in mentem.</foreign></q></note> The grace
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
of mediate illumination has for its object to prepare the
way quietly and unostentatiously for a grace of greater
import, namely, the immediate illumination of the mind
by the Holy Ghost.
</p>

<p>
b) The grace of immediate far surpasses that
of mediate illumination because the supernatural
life of the soul originates in faith, which in turn
is based on a strictly supernatural enlightenment
of the mind.
</p>

<p>
α) St. Paul expressly teaches: <q>And such confidence
we have, through Christ, towards God;
not that we are sufficient to think anything of
ourselves, as of ourselves: but our sufficiency
is of God.</q><note place='foot'>2 Cor. III, 4 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fiduciam
autem talem habemus per Christum
ad Deum; non quod sufficientes
simus cogitare aliquid a nobis quasi
ex nobis, sed sufficientia nostra
ex Deo est.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
The salient portion of this text reads as follows in
the original Greek: Οὐχ ὅτι ἱκανοί ἐσμεν λογίσασθαί τι ἀφ᾽
ἑαυτῶν ὡς ἐξ ἑαυτῶν, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ ἱκανότης ἡμῶν ἐκ τοῦ Θεοῦ. Speaking
in the plural (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pluralis maiestaticus</foreign>), the
Apostle confesses himself unable to conceive a single salutary thought
(λογίσασθαι), and ascribes the power (ἱκανότης) to do so to
God. Considered merely as vital acts, such thoughts
proceed from the natural faculties of the mind (ἀφ᾽
ἑαυτῶν), but the power that produces them is divine (ἐκ
Θεοῦ), not human (ἐξ ἑαυτῶν). Hence each salutary
thought exceeds the power of man, and is an immediate
supernatural grace.
</p>

<p>
A still more cogent argument can be derived from 1
Cor. III, 6 sq.: <q>I have planted, Apollo watered, but
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
God gave the increase. Therefore, neither he that planteth
is anything, nor he that watereth; but God that giveth
the increase.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. III, 6: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ego
plantavi, Apollo rigavit; sed Deus incrementum
dedit</foreign> (ἀλλὰ ὁ θεὸς ηὔξανεν).
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Itaque neque qui plantat est
aliquid neque qui rigat, sed qui incrementum
dat, Deus</foreign> (ὁ αὐξάνων
θεός).</q></note> In this beautiful allegory the Apostle
compares the genesis of supernatural faith in the soul to
that of a plant under the care of a gardener, who while he
plants and waters, yet looks to God for <q>the increase.</q>
The Apostle and his disciple Apollo are the spiritual gardeners
through whose preaching the Corinthians received
the grace of mediate illumination. But, as St. Paul says,
this preaching would have been useless (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non
est aliquid</foreign>)
had not God given <q>the increase.</q> In other words, the
grace of immediate illumination was necessary to make the
Apostolic preaching effective. <q>For,</q> in the words of
St. Augustine, <q>God Himself contributes to the production
of fruit in good trees, when He both externally
waters and tends them by the agency of His servants, and
internally by Himself also gives the increase.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Christi</hi>, c. 19: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ipse
in bonis arboribus cooperatur fructum,
qui et forinsecus rigat atque
excolit per quemlibet ministrum et
per se dat intrinsecus incrementum.</foreign></q>
Cfr. also Eph. I, 17 sq., Acts XXVI,
16 sqq., 2 Cor. IV, 6, 1 John II,
20 and 27.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) The argument from Tradition is based
chiefly on St. Augustine, <q>the Doctor of Grace,</q>
whose authority in this branch of dogmatic theology
is unique.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Mazzella, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, disp.
1, art. 1, §4, 3rd ed., Rome 1882.</note> His writings abound in many
such synonymous terms for the grace of immediate
illumination, as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cogitatio pia, vocatio alta et
secreta, locutio in cogitatione, aperitio veritatis</foreign>,
etc., etc.
</p>

<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>

<p>
He says among other things: <q>Instruction and admonition
are external aids, but he who controls the hearts
has his cathedra in heaven.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Tract. in Ioa.</hi>,
III, 13: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magisteria
forinsecus adiutoria quaedam
sunt et admonitiones; cathedram in
coelo habet, qui corda tenet.</foreign></q></note> Augustine esteems human
preaching as nothing and ascribes all its good effects to
grace. <q>It is the internal Master who teaches; Christ
teaches and His inspiration.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>L.c.</hi>:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Interior magister est,
qui docet; Christus docet, inspiratio
ipsius docet.</foreign></q></note> In harmony with his
master, St. Fulgentius of Ruspe, the ablest defender of
the Augustinian (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Catholic) doctrine of grace, says:
<q>In vain will our sacred discourses strike the external
ear, unless God by a spiritual gift opens the hearing of
the interior man.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep. 17 de Incarn. et Grat.</hi>
n. 67: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Frustra [divinus sermo] exterioribus
auribus sonat, nisi Deus
spiritali munere auditum hominis
interioris aperiat.</foreign></q> Other Patristic
texts will be found in the classic
work of Ripalda, <hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernaturali</hi>,
disp. 101, sect. 3-4.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_I_Section_2_No_2'/>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Strengthening Grace of the Will.</hi>&mdash;This
grace, usually called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
inspirationis</foreign>,<note place='foot'>It is to be noted, however, that
the term <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia inspirationis</foreign>, both in
the writings of St. Augustine and in
the decrees of Trent (Sess. VI, can.
3), sometimes also denotes the immediate
illuminating grace of the
mind.</note>
may also be either mediate or immediate,
according as pious affections and wholesome
resolutions are produced in the soul by a preceding
illumination of the intellect or directly by the
Holy Ghost. Owing to the psychological interaction
of intellect and will, every grace of the
mind, whether mediate or immediate, is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>eo ipso</foreign>
also a mediate grace of the will, which implies a
new act of the soul, but not a new grace. What
we are concerned with here is the immediate
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
strengthening grace of the will, which is far more
important and more necessary.
</p>

<p>
We are not able to demonstrate this teaching
from Sacred Scripture. The texts John VI, 44
and Phil. II, 13, which are usually adduced in
this connection, are inconclusive.
</p>

<p>
Hence we must rely solely on Tradition. The
argument from Tradition is based mainly on St.
Augustine. In defending divine grace against
Pelagius, this holy Doctor asserts the indispensability
and superior value of the strengthening
grace of the will.
</p>

<p>
<q>By that grace it is effected, not only that we discover
what ought to be done, but also that we do what we have
discovered; not only that we believe what ought to be loved, but also that we
love what we have believed.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Christi</hi>, c. 12:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quâ gratiâ agitur, non solum ut
facienda noverimus, verum etiam ut
cognita faciamus, nec ut solum diligenda
credamus, verum etiam ut
credita diligamus.</foreign></q></note>
And again: <q>Let him discern between knowledge and
charity, as they ought to be distinguished, because knowledge
puffeth up, but charity edifieth.... And inasmuch
as both are gifts of God, although one is less and the other
greater, he must not extol our righteousness above the
praise which is due to Him who justifies us in such a way
as to assign to the lesser of these two gifts the help of
divine grace, and to claim the greater one for the control
of the human will.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi>, c. 26:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cognitionem
et dilectionem, sicut sunt discernenda,
discernat, quia scientia
inflat, quando caritas aedificat....
Et quum sit utrumque donum Dei,
sed unum minus, alterum maius, non
sic iustitiam nostram super laudem
iustificatoris extollat, ut horum duorum
quod minus est divino tribuat
adiutorio, quod autem maius est
humano usurpet arbitrio.</foreign></q></note> St. Augustine emphasized the
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
existence and necessity of this higher grace of the will
in his controversy with the Pelagians. He was firmly
convinced that a man may know the way of salvation, and
yet refuse to follow it.<note place='foot'>He applies a variety of practically
synonymous terms to the
strengthening grace of the will, for instance:
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio coelestis</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>spiritus caritatis</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inspiratio dilectionis</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>bona voluntas</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluptas</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sanctum desiderium</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inspiratio suavitatis</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cupiditas boni</foreign>, etc.</note>
He insisted that mere knowledge
is not virtue, as Socrates had falsely taught.
</p>

<p>
Ecclesiastical Tradition was always in perfect accord
with this teaching, which eventually came to be defined by
the plenary Council of Carthage (A. D. 418) as follows:
<q>If any one assert that this same grace of God, granted
through our Lord Jesus Christ, helps to avoid sin only for
the reason that it opens and reveals to us an understanding
of the [divine] commands, so that we may know
what we should desire and what we should avoid; but
that it is not granted to us by the same (grace) to desire
and be able to do that which we know we ought to do, let
him be anathema;&mdash;since both are gifts of God: to
know what we must do and to have the wish to do it.</q><note place='foot'>Canon 4:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quisquis dixerit,
eandem gratiam Dei per Iesum
Christum D. N. propter hoc tantum
adiuvare ad non peccandum, quia
per ipsam nobis aperitur el revelatur
intelligentia mandatorum, ut sciamus
quid appetere et quid vitare debeamus,
non autem per illam nobis
praestari ut quod faciendum cognoverimus,
etiam facere diligamus
atque valeamus, a. s.; ... quum sit
utrumque donum Dei, et scire quid
facere debeamus et diligere ut faciamus.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 104.)</note>
</p>

<p>
Like the illuminating grace of the intellect the strengthening
grace of the will effects vital acts and manifests
itself chiefly in what are known as the emotions of the
will. St. Prosper, after Fulgentius the most prominent
disciple of St. Augustine, enumerates these as follows:
<q>Fear (for <q>the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom</q>);
joy (<q>I rejoiced at the things that were said to
me: We shall go into the house of the Lord</q>); desire
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
(<q>My soul longeth and fainteth for the courts of the
Lord</q>); delight (<q>How sweet are thy words to my palate,
more than honey to my mouth</q>);</q>&mdash;and he adds:
<q>Who can see or tell by what affections God visits and
guides the human soul?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra Collator.</hi>,
c. VII, 2:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Trahit timor; principium enim
sapientiae timor Domini (Prov. I, 7).
Trahit laetitia, quoniam laetatus
sum in his, quae dicta sunt mihi:
in domum Domini ibimus (Ps.
CXXI, 1). Trahit desiderium, quoniam
concupiscit et deficit anima mea
in atria Domini (Ps. LXXXIII, 3).
Trahunt delectationes: quam dulcia
enim faucibus meis eloquia tua,
super mel et favum ori meo (Ps.
CXVIII, 103). Et quis perspicere
aut enarrare possit, per quos affectus
visitatio Dei animum ducat humanum?</foreign></q>
Cfr. Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Divina</hi>, thes. 11; Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>, thes. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Actual Graces of the Sensitive Sphere.</hi>&mdash;Though
it cannot be determined with certainty
of faith, it is highly probable that actual grace influences
the sensitive faculties of the soul as well
as the intellect and the will.
</p>

<p>
God, who is the first and sole cause of all things, is
no doubt able to excite in the human imagination phantasms
corresponding to the supernatural thoughts produced
in the intellect, and to impede or paralyze the rebellious
stirrings of concupiscence which resist the grace
of the will,&mdash;either by infusing contrary dispositions or
by allowing spiritual joy to run over into the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>appetitus
sensitivus</foreign>. The existence of such graces (which need
not necessarily be supernatural except <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quoad modum et
finem</foreign>) may be inferred with great probability from
the fact that man is a compound of body and soul.
Aristotle holds that the human mind cannot think without
the aid of the imagination.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Anima</hi>,
I, 8: Ἄνευ φαντάσματος οὐκ ἔστι νοεῖν.</note> If this is true, every
supernatural thought must be preceded by a corresponding
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
phantasm to excite and sustain it. As for the sensitive
appetite, it may either assume the form of concupiscence
and hinder the work of salvation, or aid it
by favorable emotions excited supernaturally. St. Augustine
says that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio
victrix</foreign> has for its object <q>to impart sweetness to that
which gave no pleasure.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Peccatorum Meritis et
Remissione</hi>, II, 19, 33: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... ut
suave faciat, quod non delectabat.</foreign></q></note> St.
Paul, who thrice besought the Lord to relieve him of the
sting of his flesh, was told: <q>My grace is sufficient for
thee.</q><note place='foot'>2 Cor. XII, 9: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sufficit
tibi gratia mea.</foreign></q> For further information
on this point the student
is referred to Ripalda, <hi rend='italic'>De Ente
Supernaturali</hi>, disp. 44, sect. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_I_Section_2_No_4'/>
4. <hi rend='italic'>The Illuminating Grace of the Mind
and the Strengthening Grace of the Will
Considered as Vital Acts of the Soul.</hi>&mdash;If
we examine these graces more closely to determine
their physical nature, we find that they are
simply vital acts of the intellect and the will, and
receive the character of divine <q>graces</q> from
the fact that they are supernaturally excited in
the soul by God.
</p>

<p>
a) The Biblical, Patristic, and conciliar terms
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cogitatio</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>suasio</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cognitio</foreign>, as well as
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluptas</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>desiderium</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caritas</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>bona voluntas</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cupiditas</foreign>, all manifestly
point to vital acts of the soul. But even where grace is
described as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vocatio</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>illuminatio</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>illustratio</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>excitatio</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pulsatio</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inspiratio</foreign>, or
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>tractio</foreign>, the reference can only be&mdash;if
not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>formaliter</foreign>, at
least <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>virtualiter</foreign>&mdash;to immanent vital
acts of the intellect or will. This is the concurrent teaching
of SS. Augustine and Thomas Aquinas. The former
says: <q>God calls [us] by [our] innermost thoughts,</q>
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
and: <q>See how the Father draws [and] by teaching delights
[us].</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Psalmos</hi>, 102, n. 16:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vocat [Deus] per
intimam cognitionem.</foreign></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Tract.
in Ioa.</hi>, 26, n.
7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Videte quomodo trahit Pater,
docendo delectat.</foreign></q></note> The latter quotes the Aristotelian axiom:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Actus moventis in moto est
motus.</foreign></q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu.
110, art. 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
If the graces of the intellect and of the will are supernaturally
inspired acts of the soul, by what process does
the mind of man respond to the impulse of illumination
and inspiration?
</p>

<p>
The language employed by the Fathers and councils
leaves no doubt that supernatural knowledge manifests
itself mainly in judgments. But simple apprehension and
ratiocination must also play a part, (1) because these two
operations are of the essence of human thought, and the
grace of illumination always works through natural
agencies; and (2) because some intellectual apprehensions
are merely condensed judgments and syllogisms.
</p>

<p>
The graces of the will naturally work through the
spiritual emotions or passions, of which there are eleven:
love and hatred, joy and sadness, desire and abhorrence,
hope and despair, fear and daring, and lastly anger.
With the exception of despair (for which there is no
place in the business of salvation), all these passions have
a practical relation to good and evil and are consequently
called <q>graces</q> both in Scripture and Tradition. Love
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>amor</foreign>) is the fundamental affection of the
will, to which all others are reducible, and hence the principal function
of grace, in so far as it affects the will, must consist in producing
acts of love.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>S. Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 25, art.
2.</note> The Council of Carthage (A. D.
418) declares that <q>both to know what we must do, and
to love to do it, is a gift of God.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>... quum sit utrumque donum
Dei, et scire quid facere debeamus,
et diligere ut faciamus.</foreign></q> (<hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
<ref target='Pg025'>p. 25</ref>.)</note> It would be a mistake,
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
however, to identify this <q>love</q> with theological
charity, which is <q>a perfect love of God above all things
for His own sake.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Amor Dei
propter se super omnia.</foreign></q></note> Justification begins with supernatural
faith, is followed by fear, hope, and contrition,
and culminates in charity.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. infra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_I'>Part II, Ch. I</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Augustine sometimes employs the word
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caritas</foreign> in
connections where it cannot possibly mean theological
love.<note place='foot'>Cfr., <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>De Trinitate</hi>, VIII,
10: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quid est dilectio vel caritas,
quam tantopere Scriptura divina
laudat et praedicat, nisi amor boni?</foreign></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Contra
Duas Epistolas Pelag.</hi>, II,
9, 21: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quid est boni cupiditas nisi
caritas?</foreign></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Christi</hi>, c. 21:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quasi vero aliud sit bona voluntas
quam caritas.</foreign></q></note> This peculiar usage is based on the idea that love
of goodness in a certain way attracts man towards God
and prepares him for the theological virtue of charity.
In studying the writings of St. Augustine, therefore, we
must carefully distinguish between
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caritas</foreign> in the strict,
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caritas</foreign>
in a secondary and derived sense.<note place='foot'>It should also be noted that
in Augustine's writings <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inspiratio
caritatis</foreign>, as an immediate grace of
the will, is not necessarily identical
with the infusion of theological love.</note> The
champions of the falsely so-called Augustinian theory of
grace<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi> Berti,
<hi rend='italic'>De Theol. Discipl.</hi>,
XIV, 7.</note> disregard this important distinction and erroneously
claim that St. Augustine identifies <q>grace</q> with
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caritas</foreign>
in the sense of theological love; just as if faith,
hope, contrition, and the fear of God were not also graces
in the true meaning of the term, and could not exist without
theological charity.
</p>

<p>
b) Not a few theologians, especially of the Thomist
school, enlarge the list of actual graces by including
therein, besides the supernatural vital acts of the soul,
certain extrinsic, non-vital qualities
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>qualitates fluentes,
non vitales</foreign>) that precede these acts and form their basis.
It is impossible, they argue, to elicit vital or immanent
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
supernatural acts unless the faculties of the soul have
previously been raised to the supernatural order by means
of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentia obœdientialis</foreign>.
The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia elevans</foreign>, which
produces in the soul of the sinner the same effects that the
so-called infused habits produce in the soul of the just,
is a supernatural power really distinct from its vital
effects. In other words, they say, the vital supernatural
acts of the soul are preceded and produced by a non-vital
grace, which must be conceived as a <q>fluent quality.</q>
These <q>fluent</q> (the opponents of the theory ironically
call them <q>dead</q>) qualities are alleged to be real graces.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Alvarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Aux.</hi>, disp.
67, n. 6.</note>
Alvarez and others endeavor to give their theory a dogmatic
standing by quoting in its support all those passages
of Sacred Scripture, the Fathers and councils in which
prevenient grace is described as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pulsatio</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>excitatio</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vocatio</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>tractio</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>tactus</foreign>,
and so forth. The act of knocking or calling,
they say, is not identical with the act of opening, in
fact the former is a grace in a higher sense than the
latter, because it is performed by God alone, while the
response comes from the soul coöperating with God.<note place='foot'>Alvarez,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, disp. 74.&mdash;Cfr.
John VI, 44: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nemo potest
venire ad me, nisi Pater, qui misit
me, traxerit eum.</foreign></q> Apoc. III, 20:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ecce sto ad ostium et pulso; si quis
audierit vocem meam et aperuerit
mihi ianuam, intrabo ad illum.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
The theory thus briefly described is both theologically
and philosophically untenable.
</p>

<p>
α) Holy Scripture and Tradition nowhere mention any
such non-vital entities or qualities,&mdash;a circumstance
which would be inexplicable if it were true, what Cardinal
Gotti asserts,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment. in Summam Theol.
S. Thomae Aquinatis</hi>, p. 2, tr. 6, qu.
2, art. 2, §2.</note> that the term <q>grace</q> applies primarily
and in the strict sense to these qualities, while the vital
acts are merely effects. Whenever Sacred Scripture, the
Fathers, and the Church speak literally, without the use
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
of metaphors, they invariably apply the term <q>grace</q> to
these vital acts themselves and ascribe their supernatural
character to an immediate act of God.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
Nos. <ref target='Part_I_Chapter_I_Section_2_No_1'>1</ref>
and <ref target='Part_I_Chapter_I_Section_2_No_2'>2</ref>.</note> In perfect
conformity with this teaching St. Augustine explains such
metaphorical terms as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vocare</foreign>
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>tangere</foreign> in the sense of
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credere</foreign> and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides</foreign>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ad
Simplic.</hi>, I, 2, n. 21: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quis
potest credere, nisi aliquâ vocatione,
h. e. aliquâ rerum testificatione
tangatur? Quis habet in potestate
tali viso attingi mentem suam, quo
eius voluntas moveatur ad fidem?</foreign></q></note>
God employs no <q>fluent qualities</q>
or <q>non-vital entities</q> in the dispensation of His grace,
but effects the supernatural elevation of the soul immediately
and by Himself.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Div. Grat.</hi>,
III, 4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In Conciliis et Patribus
nullum vestigium talis gratiae invenimus,
quin potius ipsam inspirationem
ponunt ut gratiam primam
et praeterea indicant immediate infundi
ab ipso Spiritu Sancto et non
mediante aliquâ qualitate.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
β) The theory under consideration is inadmissible also
from the philosophical point of view. A quality does not
<q>flow</q> or tend to revert to nothingness. On the contrary,
its very nature demands that it remain constant until
destroyed by its opposite or by some positive cause. It
is impossible to conceive a quality that would of itself
revert to nothingness without the intervention of a destructive
cause. Billuart merely beats the air when he
says: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Potest dici qualitas incompleta habens se per
modum passionis transeuntis.</foreign></q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia</hi>, diss. 4, art. 2.</note> What would Aristotle
have said if he had been told of a thing that was half
ποιόν and half πάσχειν, and consequently neither the one nor
the other? Actual grace is transitory; it passes away with
the act which it inspires, and consequently may be said
to <q>flow.</q> But this very fact proves that it is not a dead
quality, but a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>modus vitalis
supernaturalis</foreign>. In the dispensation
of His grace, God employs no fluent qualities
or non-vital entities, but He Himself is the immediate
cause of the supernatural elevation of the human soul and
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
its faculties. St. Thomas is perfectly consistent, therefore,
when he defines actual grace as a vital act of the
soul.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 110,
art. 2: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In eo, qui dicitur gratiam
Dei habere, significatur esse quidam
effectus gratuitae Dei voluntatis.
Dictum est autem supra (qu. 109,
art. 1), quod dupliciter ex gratuita
Dei voluntate homo adiuvatur: uno
modo inquantum anima hominis
movetur a Deo ad aliquid cognoscendum
vel volendum vel agendum;
et hoc modo ipse gratuitus effectus
in homine non est qualitas, sed
motus quidam animae; actus enim
moventis in moto est motus, ut dicitur
(Phys. 1, 3, text. 18). Alio
modo adiuvatur homo ex gratuita
Dei voluntate, secundum quod aliquod
habituale donum a Deo animae
infunditur ... et sic donum gratiae
qualitas quaedam est.</foreign></q>&mdash;Cfr. Palmieri,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Div. Actuali</hi>, thes.
16; Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelect. Dogmat.</hi>, Vol.
V, 3rd ed., pp. 23 sqq.; Schiffini,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 220 sqq.
The Thomistic doctrine on this point
is viewed with favor by several
Molinist theologians, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Platel
(<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, n. 547) and Gutberlet
(<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII,
pp. 25 sq., Mainz 1897).</note>
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Prevenient and Coöperating Grace.</hi>&mdash;The
vital acts of the soul are either spontaneous
impulses or free acts of the will. Grace may
precede free-will or coöperate with it. If it
precedes the free determination of the will it is
called prevenient; if it accompanies (or coincides
with) that determination and merely coöperates
with the will, it is called coöperating grace.
</p>

<p>
Prevenient grace, regarded as a divine call to penance,
is often styled <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
vocans sive excitans</foreign>, and if it is received
with a willing heart, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
adiuvans</foreign>. Both species
are distinctly mentioned in Holy Scripture. Cfr.
Eph. V, 14: <q>Wherefore he saith: Rise thou that
sleepest, and arise from the dead: and Christ shall enlighten
thee.</q> 2 Tim. I, 9: <q>Who hath delivered us
and called us by his holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which
was given us in Christ Jesus before the times of the
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
world.</q> Rom. VIII, 26: <q>Likewise the Spirit also helpeth
our infirmity.</q> Rom. VIII, 30: <q>And whom he
predestinated, them he also called. And whom he called,
them he also justified. And whom he justified, them he
also glorified.</q> Apoc. III, 20: <q>Behold I stand at the
gate and knock. If any man shall hear my voice, and
open to me the door, I will come in to him, and will sup
with him, and he with me.</q>
</p>

<p>
St. Augustine says: <q>Forasmuch as our turning away
from God is our own act and deed, and this is [our]
depraved will; but that we turn to God, this we cannot do
except He rouse and help us, and this is [our] good will,&mdash;what
have we that we have not received?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Peccat. Merit. et Rem.</hi>, II,
18: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quoniam quod a Deo nos
avertimus nostrum est, et haec est
voluntas mala; quod vero ad Deum
nos convertimus nisi ipso excitante
et adiuvante non possumus, et haec
est voluntas bona.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
An equivalent division is that into <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
operans</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>coöperans</foreign>,
respectively&mdash;names which are also founded
on Scripture. Cfr. Phil. II, 13: <q>For it is God who
worketh in you, both to will and to accomplish, according
to his good will.</q> Mark XVI, 20: <q>But they going
forth preached everywhere: the Lord working withal, and
confirming the word with signs that followed.</q>
</p>

<p>
St. Augustine describes the respective functions of
these graces as follows: <q>He [God] begins His influence
by working in us that we may have the will, and He
completes it by working with us when we have the
will.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Grat. et Lib. Arbitr.</hi>, c. 17,
33: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ipse ut velimus, operatur incipiens,
qui volentibus cooperatur
perficiens.</foreign></q>&mdash;On certain differences
of opinion on this point between
Suarez (<hi rend='italic'>De Div. Motione</hi>,
III, 5) and St. Thomas (<hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 111, art. 2), see
Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 252
sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
A third division of the same grace is that into
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praeveniens</foreign>
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>subsequens</foreign>.
It is likewise distinctly Scriptural,<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Ps. LVIII, 11; XXII, 6.</note>
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
and its two members coincide materially with
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia vocans</foreign>
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>adiuvans</foreign>, as can be seen by comparing
the usage of St. Augustine with that of the Tridentine
Council. <q>God's mercy,</q> says the holy Doctor, <q>prevents
[<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> precedes] the unwilling to make him willing; it follows the
willing lest he will in vain.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>,
c. 32: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nolentem
praevenit, ut velit; volentem
subsequitur, ne frustra velit.</foreign></q></note> And the Council
of Trent declares that <q>in adults the beginning of justification
is to be derived from the prevenient grace of
God, through Jesus Christ, that is to say, from His vocation,
whereby, without any merits existing on their part,
they are called.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI,
cap. 5: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Declarat praeterea, ipsius justificationis
exordium in adultis a
Dei per Iesum Christum praeveniente
gratia sumendum esse, h. e.
ab eius vocatione, qua nullis eorum
existentibus meritis vocantur.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 797.)</note>
</p>

<p>
If we conceive a continuous series of supernatural
graces, each may be called either prevenient or subsequent,
according as it is regarded either as a cause
or as an effect. St. Thomas explains this as follows:
<q>As grace is divided into working and coöperating
grace, according to its diverse effects, so it may
also be divided into prevenient and subsequent grace,
according to the meaning attached to the term grace
[<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, either habitual or actual]. The effects which grace
works in us are five: (1) It heals the soul; (2) moves
it to will that which is good; (3) enables man efficaciously
to perform the good deeds which he wills; (4)
helps him to persevere in his good resolves; and (5)
assists him in attaining to the state of glory. In so far
as it produces the first of these effects, grace is called
prevenient in respect of the second; and in so far as it
produces the second, it is called subsequent in respect of
the first. And as each effect is posterior to one and prior
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
to another, so grace may be called prevenient or subsequent
according as we regard it in its relations to different
effects.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 111,
art. 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sicut gratia dividitur in
operantem et cooperantem secundum
diversos effectus, ita etiam in praevenientem
et subsequentem, qualitercumque
gratia accipiatur (i.e. sive
habitualis sive actualis). Sunt autem
quinque effectus gratiae in
nobis, quorum primus est ut anima
sanetur; secundus ut bonum velit;
tertius est ut bonum quod vult
efficaciter operetur; quartus est ut
in bono perseveret; quintus est ut
ad gloriam perveniat. Et ideo
gratia, secundum quod causat in
nobis primum effectum, vocatur
praeveniens respectu secundi effectus;
et prout causat in nobis secundum,
vocatur subsequens respectu
primi effectus. Et sicut unus
effectus est posterior uno effectu et
prior alio, ita gratia potest dici
praeveniens et subsequens secundum
eundem effectum respectu diversorum.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
Among so many prevenient graces there must be one
which is preceded by none other
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>simpliciter praeveniens</foreign>),
and this is preëminently the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia vocans s.
excitans</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
There is a fourth and last division, mentioned by the
Council of Trent, which is also based on the relation of
grace to free-will. <q>Jesus Christ Himself,</q> says the holy
Synod, <q>continually infuses His virtue into the justified,
and this virtue always precedes, accompanies, and follows
their good works.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI,
cap. 16: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Iesus Christus in ipsos iustificatos
iugiter virtutem influit, quae
virtus bona eorum opera semper
antecedit et comitatur et subsequitur.</foreign></q></note>
The opposition here lies between
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia antecedens</foreign>,
which is a spontaneous movement of the soul, and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia concomitans</foreign>, which coöperates
with free-will after it has given its consent. This
terminology may be applied to the good works of sinners
and saints alike. For the sinner no less than the just man
receives two different kinds of graces&mdash;(1) such as precede
the free determination of the will and (2) such as
accompany his free acts.
</p>

<p>
Thus it can be readily seen that the fundamental division
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
of actual grace, considered in its relation to free-will,
is that into prevenient and coöperating grace. All other
divisions are based on a difference of function rather than
of nature.<note place='foot'>On the distinction to be
drawn between the various members
of these pairs, whether it be
real or merely logical, theologians
differ. Cfr. Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Div. Grat.</hi>,
thes. 18; Chr. Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelect.
Dogmat.</hi>, Vol. V, 3rd ed., pp. 17
sqq.; Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp.
241 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
a) The existence of prevenient grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
praeveniens s. excitans s. vocans</foreign>) may be inferred
from the fact that the process of justification
begins with the illumination of the intellect,
which is by nature unfree, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> devoid of the
power of choosing between good and evil. That
there are also graces which consist in spontaneous,
indeliberate motions of the will,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
Nos. <ref target='Part_I_Chapter_I_Section_2_No_1'>1</ref> and
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_I_Section_2_No_4'>4</ref>.</note> is clearly
taught by the Council of Trent,<note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 5 and can. 4,
quoted in Denzinger-Bannwart's
<hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>, n. 797 and 814.</note> and evidenced
by certain Biblical metaphors. Thus God is described
as knocking at the gate (Apoc. III, 20), as
drawing men to Him (John VI, 44), and men are
said to harden their hearts against His voice (Ps.
XCIV, 8), etc. Cfr. Jer. XVII, 23: <q>But they
did not hear, nor incline their ear: but hardened
their neck, that they might not hear me, and might
not receive instruction.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Catholic tradition is voiced by St. Augustine,
who says: <q>The will itself can in no wise
be moved, unless it meets with something which
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
delights or attracts the mind; but it is not in the
power of man to bring this about.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ad
Simplic.</hi>, I, qu. 2, n. 22:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Voluntas ipsa, nisi aliquid occurrerit,
quod delectet atque invitet
animum, moveri nullo modo potest;
hoc autem ut occurrat, non est in
hominis potestate.</foreign></q></note> St. Prosper
enumerates a long list of spontaneous emotions
which he calls supernatural graces of the
will.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contr. Collator.</hi>, c. VII, 2:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et quis perspicere aut enarrare
possit, per quos affectus visitatio
Dei animum ducat humanum, ut quae
fugiebat sequatur, quae oderat diligat,
quae fastidiebat esuriat, ac subitâ
commutatione mirabili quae
clausa ei fuerant sint aperta, quae
onerosa levia, quae amara sint
dulcia, quae obscura sint lucida?</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
Prevenient grace is aptly characterized by the Patristic
formula: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia est
in nobis, sed sine nobis</foreign>,</q> that is,
grace, as a vital act, is in the soul, but as a salutary act it
proceeds, not from the free will, but from God. In other
words, though the salutary acts of grace derive their
vitality from the human will, they are mere <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actus
hominis</foreign> (θέλησις), not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actus humani</foreign>
(βούλησις).<note place='foot'>Cfr. M. Cronin, <hi rend='italic'>The Science of
Ethics</hi>, Vol. I, pp. 30 sqq., Dublin
1909.</note> <q>God,</q> explains
St. Augustine, <q>does many good things in man,
which man does not do; but man does none which God
does not cause man to do.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra
Duas Epistolas Pelagian.</hi>,
II, 9, 21: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Multa Deus facit
in homine bona, quae non facit
homo; nulla vero facit homo, quae
non facit Deus, ut faciat homo.</foreign></q></note> And again: <q>[God]
operates without us, in order that we may become willing;
but when we once will so as to act, He coöperates with us.
We can, however, ourselves do nothing to effect good
works of piety without Him either working that we may
will, or coöperating when we will.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia et Lib. Arbitr.</hi>, c.
17, n. 33: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ut ergo velimus, sine
nobis operatur; quum autem volumus
et sic volumus ut faciamus, nobiscum
cooperatur; tamen sine illo vel
operante ut velimus, vel cooperante
quum volumus, ad bona pietatis
opera nihil valemus.</foreign></q></note> St. Bernard employs
similar language.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Gratia et Lib. Arbitr.</hi>, c.
14: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si ergo Deus tria haec, h. e.
bonum cogitare, velle, perficere,
operatur in nobis (2 Cor. III, 5;
Phil. II, 13), primum profecto sine
nobis, secundum nobiscum, tertium
per nos facit. Siquidem immittendo
bonam cogitationem, nos praevenit;
immutando etiam malam voluntatem
sibi per consensum iungit; ministrando
et consensui facultatem foris per
apertum opus nostrum internus opifex
innotescit. Sane ipsi nos praevenire
nequaquam possumus. Qui
autem bonum neminem invenit,
neminem salvat, quem non praevenit.
A Deo ergo sine dubio nostrae fit
salutis exordium, nec per nos utique
nec nobiscum. Verum consensus et
opus, etsi non ex nobis, non iam
tamen sine nobis.</foreign></q>&mdash;On the misinterpretation
of this text by the
Jansenists, see Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Divina Actuali</hi>, pp. 84 sq.</note>
</p>

<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>

<p>
b) Coöperating grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia cooperans s.
adiuvans s. subsequens</foreign>) differs from prevenient
grace in this, that it supposes a deliberate act of
consent on the part of the will (βούλησις, not
θέλησις). St. Gregory the Great tersely explains
the distinction as follows: <q>The divine goodness
first effects something in us without our coöperation
[<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia praeveniens</foreign>], and then, as the will
freely consents, coöperates with us in performing the good which we desire
[<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
cooperans</foreign>].</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Moral.</hi>,
XVI, 10: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Superna
pietas prius agit in nobis aliquid
sine nobis [gratia praeveniens], ut
subsequente libero arbitrio bonum,
quod appetimus, agat nobiscum
[gratia cooperans].</foreign></q></note>
That such free and consequently meritorious acts
are attributable to grace is emphasized by the
Tridentine Council: <q>So great is the bounty [of
God] towards all men that He will have the things
which are His own gifts to be their merits.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Trid.</hi>, Sess. VI, c. 16:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Tanta est [Dei] erga homines
bonitas, ut eorum velit esse merita
quae sunt ipsius dona.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 810.)</note>
Such free salutary acts are not only graces in the
general sense, but real actual graces, in as far as
they produce other salutary acts, and their existence
is as certain as the fact that many men freely
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
follow the call of grace, work out their salvation,
and attain to the beatific vision. It is only in this
way, in fact, that Heaven is peopled with Saints.
</p>

<p>
α) St. Augustine embodies all these considerations in
the following passage: <q>It is certain that we keep the
commandments when we will; but because the will is
prepared by the Lord, we must ask of Him that we may
will so much as is sufficient to make us act in willing. It
is certain that we will whenever we like, but it is He
who makes us will what is good, of whom it is said
(Prov. VIII, 35): <q>The will is prepared by the Lord,</q>
and of whom it is said (Ps. XXXVI, 32): <q>The steps
of a [good] man are ordered by the Lord, and his way
doth He will,</q> and of whom it is said (Phil. II, 13): <q>It
is God who worketh in you, even to will.</q> It is certain
that we act whenever we set to work; but it is He who
causes us to act, by giving thoroughly efficacious powers
to our will, who has said (Ezech. XXXVI, 27): <q>I will
cause you to walk in my commandments, and to keep my
judgments, and do them.</q> When He says: <q>I will cause
you ... to do them,</q> what else does He say in fact than
(Ezech. XI, 19): <q>I will take away the stony heart out
of their flesh,</q> from which used to rise your inability to
act, and (Ezech. XXXVI, 26): <q>I will give you a heart
of flesh,</q> in order that you may act.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Grat. et Lib. Arbitr.</hi>, c. 16,
32: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Certum enim est nos mandata
servare, si volumus; sed quia praeparatur
voluntas a Domino, ab illo
petendum est, ut tantum velimus
quantum sufficit, ut volendo faciamus.
Certum est nos velle,
quum volumus; sed ille facit ut velimus
bonum, de quo dictum est quod
paulo ante posui (Prov. VIII, 35):
<q>Praeparatur voluntas a Domino</q>;
de quo dictum est (Ps. XXXVI,
32): <q>A Domino gressus hominis
dirigentur et viam eius volet</q>; de
quo dictum est (Phil. II, 13):
<q>Deus est qui operatur in nobis et
velle.</q> Certum est nos facere quum
facimus; sed ille facit ut faciamus,
praebendo vires efficacissimas voluntati,
qui dixit (Ezech. XXXVI, 27):
<q>Faciam ut in iustificationibus meis
ambuletis et iudicia mea observetis
et faciatis.</q> Quum dicit: <q>Faciam ut
faciatis,</q> quid aliud dicit nisi (Ezech.
XI, 19): <q>Auferam a vobis cor
lapideum,</q> unde non faciebatis,
(Ezech. XXXVI, 26), et <q>dabo vobis
cor carneum,</q> unde facitis.</foreign></q>&mdash;On
the subject of this paragraph see
Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, thes. 10, and Chr.
Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, pp. 14 sqq.</note>
</p>

<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>

<p>
β) The manner in which grace and free-will coöperate
is a profound philosophical and theological problem. A
salutary act derives its supernatural character from
God, its vitality from the human will. How do these
two factors conjointly produce one and the same
act? The unity of the act would be destroyed if
God and the free-will of man in each case performed,
either two separate acts, or each half of the same
act. To preserve the unity of a supernatural act two
conditions are required: (1) the divine power of grace
must be transformed into the vital strength of the will
and (2) the created will, which by its own power can
perform at most a naturally good act, must be equipped
with the supernatural power of grace. These conditions
are met (a) by the supernatural elevation of the will
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>elevatio externa</foreign>),
and (b) by the supernatural concurrence of God
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>concursus supernaturalis ad actum secundum</foreign>).
The supernatural elevation of the will is accomplished
in this wise: God, by employing the illuminating
and strengthening grace, works on the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentia obœdientialis</foreign>,
and thus raises the will above its purely natural
powers and constitutes it a supernatural faculty <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in actu
primo</foreign> for the free performance of a salutary act. The
divine concursus supervenes to enable the will to perform
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actus secundus</foreign> or salutary act proper.
This special divine concurrence, in contradistinction to the natural concursus
whereby God supports the created universe,<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 67 sqq.</note> is
a strictly supernatural and gratuitous gift. Consequently,
God and the human will jointly perform one and the
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
same salutary act&mdash;God as the principal, the will as the
instrumental cause.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Div. Grat.
Actuali</hi>; thes. 17, and Chr. Pesch,
<hi rend='italic'>Praelect. Dogmat.</hi>, Vol. V, 3rd ed.,
pp. 28 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_I_Section_2_No_6'/>
6. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Efficacious Grace and Merely Sufficient
Grace.</hi>&mdash;By efficacious grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
efficax</foreign>) we understand that divine assistance
which with infallible certainty includes the free
salutary act. Whether the certainty of its operation
results from the physical nature of this particular
grace, or from God's infallible foreknowledge
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia media</foreign>), is a question in dispute
between Thomists and Molinists.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. infra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_III_Section_2'>Ch. III, Sect. 2</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Merely sufficient grace
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia mere sufficiens</foreign>)
is that divine assistance whereby God communicates
to the human will full power to perform a
salutary act (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>posse</foreign>) but not the action itself
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>agere</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
The division of grace into efficacious and
merely sufficient is not identical with that into
prevenient and coöperating. Coöperating grace
does not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex vi notionis</foreign> include with infallible
certainty the salutary act. It may indeed be
efficacious, but in matter of fact frequently fails
to attain its object because the will offers resistance.
</p>

<p>
a) The existence of efficacious graces is as certain
as that there is a Heaven filled with Saints.
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
God would be neither omnipotent nor infinitely wise if
all His graces were frustrated by the free-will of man.
St. Augustine repeatedly expresses his belief in the existence
of efficacious graces. Thus he writes in his
treatise on Grace and Free-Will: <q>It is certain that we
act whenever we set to work; but it is He [God] who
causes us to act, by giving thoroughly efficacious powers
to the will.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Grat. et Lib. Arbitr.</hi>, c.
16, 32: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Certum est nos facere,
quum facimus; sed ille facit ut
faciamus, praebendo vires efficacissimas
voluntati.</foreign></q></note> And in another treatise: <q>[Adam] had
received the ability (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>posse</foreign>)
if he would [<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia sufficiens</foreign>],
but he had not the will to exercise that ability [<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
efficax</foreign>]; for if he had possessed that will, he would have
persevered.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Corrept. et Grat.</hi>, c. 11:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Acceperat posse, si vellet [gratia
sufficiens]; sed non habuit velle
[gratia efficax] quod posset, nam si
habuisset, perseverasset.</foreign></q> Cfr. Palmieri,
<hi rend='italic'>De Div. Grat. Actuali</hi>, thes.
11.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) Before demonstrating the existence of sufficient
grace it is necessary, in view of certain
heretical errors, carefully to define the term.
</p>

<p>
α) Actual grace may be regarded either in its
intrinsic energy or power (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>virtus</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potestas agendi</foreign>)
or in its extrinsic efficacy (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>efficientia</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>efficacitas</foreign>).
All graces are efficacious considered
in their intrinsic energy, because all confer
the physical and moral power necessary to perform
the salutary act for the sake of which they
are bestowed. From this point of view, therefore,
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in actu primo</foreign>,
there is no real but a purely
logical distinction between efficacious and merely
sufficient grace. If we look to the final result,
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
however, we find that this differs according as
the will either freely coöperates with grace or
refuses its coöperation. If the will coöperates,
grace becomes truly efficacious; if the will resists,
grace remains <q>merely sufficient.</q> In other
words, merely sufficient grace confers full power
to act, but is rendered ineffective by the resistance
of the will.
</p>

<p>
The inefficacy of merely sufficient grace, therefore, is
owing to the resistance of the will and not to any lack of
intrinsic power. This is a truth to which all Catholic
systems of grace must conform.
</p>

<p>
Merely sufficient grace may be subdivided into <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
proxime sufficiens</foreign> and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia remote sufficiens</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proximately sufficient grace (also called
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia operationis</foreign>)
confers upon the will full power to act forthwith,
while remotely sufficient grace (also termed <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
orationis</foreign>) confers only the grace of prayer, which in its
turn brings down full power to perform other salutary
acts.
</p>

<p>
The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia orationis</foreign> plays a most important
rôle in the divine economy of grace. God has not obliged Himself
to give man immediately all the graces he needs. It is
His will, in many instances, as when we are besieged by
temptations, that we petition Him for further assistance.
<q>God does not enjoin impossibilities,</q> says St. Augustine,
<q>but in His injunctions He counsels you both to do
what you can for yourself, and to ask His aid in what
you cannot do.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Nat. et Grat.</hi>,
43: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nam
Deus impossibilia non iubet, sed
iubendo monet, et facere quod
possis, et petere quod non possis,
et adiuvat ut possis.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>

<p>
Hence, though grace may sometimes remain ineffective
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia inefficax</foreign> =
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia vere et mere sufficiens</foreign>), it is
never insufficient (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>insufficiens</foreign>),
that is to say, never too
weak to accomplish its purpose.
</p>

<p>
Calvinism and Jansenism, while retaining the
name, have eliminated sufficient grace from their
doctrinal systems.
</p>

<p>
Jansenius (+ 1638) admits a kind of <q>sufficient grace,</q>
which he calls <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia parva</foreign>,
but it is really insufficient because
no action can result from it unless it is supplemented
by another and more powerful grace.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Christi</hi>, IV, 10:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... ita inefficax, ex qua operatio
ne possit quidem sequi, nisi eius
inefficacia per aliam suppleatur.</foreign></q></note> This
heretic denounced sufficient grace in the Catholic sense
as a monstrous conception and a means of peopling hell
with reprobates.<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Illud
a recentioribus prolatum
gratiae sufficientis genus, quo adiuvante
nullum unquam opus factum
est aut fiet unquam, videtur monstrum
quoddam singulare gratiae,
solummodo peccatis faciendis maiorique
damnationi accersendae
serviens.</foreign></q> (<hi rend='italic'>De Grat. Christi</hi>, III,
3).</note> Some of his followers even went so
far as to assert that <q>in our present state sufficient grace
is pernicious rather than useful to us, and we have reason
to pray: From sufficient grace, O Lord, deliver
us!</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia sufficiens statui
nostro non tam utilis quam perniciosa est,
sic ut proinde merito possimus
petere: A gratia sufficienti libera
nos, Domine.</foreign></q> This assertion was
condemned by Pope Alexander VIII
in 1690. It is convincingly refuted
by Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp.
354 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) It is an article of faith that there is a merely
sufficient grace and that it is truly sufficient
even when frustrated by the resistance of the
will. The last-mentioned point is emphasized by
the Second Council of Orange (A. D. 529):
<q>This also we believe, according to the Catholic
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
faith, that all baptized persons, through the grace
received in Baptism, and with the help and coöperation
of Christ, are able and in duty bound, if
they will faithfully do their share, to comply
with all the conditions necessary for
salvation.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hoc etiam secundum
fidem catholicam credimus, quod acceptâ
per baptismum gratiâ omnes baptizati
Christo auxiliante et cooperante,
quae ad salutem pertinent, possint
et debeant, si fideliter laborare
voluerint, adimplere.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 200.)</note>
The existence of sufficient grace was formally defined
by the Council of Trent as follows: <q>If any
one saith that man's free-will, moved and excited
by God, ... no wise coöperates towards disposing
and preparing itself for obtaining the grace
of justification; that it cannot refuse its consent if
it would, ... let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI,
can. 4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, liberum hominis arbitrium
a Deo motum et excitatum nihil
cooperari Deo, ... neque posse dissentire,
si velit, anathema sit.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 814.)</note>
</p>

<p>
This dogma can be convincingly demonstrated
both from Sacred Scripture and Tradition.
</p>

<p>
(1) God Himself complains through the mouth
of the prophet Isaias: <q>What is there that I
ought to do more to my vineyard, that I have not
done to it? Was it that I looked that it should
bring forth grapes, and it hath brought forth wild
grapes?</q><note place='foot'>Is. V, 4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quid est, quod
debui ultra facere vineae meae et
non feci ei? An quod exspectavi,
ut faceret uvas et fecit labruscas?</foreign></q></note> This complaint clearly applies
to the Jews. Yahweh did for the Jewish nation whatever
it behooved Him to do lavishly (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
vere sufficiens</foreign>), but His kindness was unrequited
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia mere sufficiens</foreign>). In the Book of
Proverbs He addresses the sinner in these terms:
<q>I called, and you refused: I stretched out my
hand, and there was none that regarded.</q><note place='foot'>Prov.
I, 24: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vocavi et renuistis,
extendi manum meam et non
fuit qui adspiceret.</foreign></q></note>
What does this signify if not the complete sufficiency
of grace? The proffered grace remained
inefficacious simply because the sinner rejected it
of his own free will. Upbraiding the wicked cities
of Corozain and Bethsaida, our Lord exclaims:
<q>If in Tyre and Sidon had been wrought the
miracles that have been wrought in you, they had
long ago done penance in sackcloth and ashes.</q><note place='foot'>Matth.
XI, 21.</note>
The omniscient God-man here asserts the existence
of graces which remained inefficacious in
Corozain and Bethsaida, though had they been
given to the inhabitants of Tyre and Sidon, they
would have proved effective. The conclusion evidently
is: these graces remained ineffective, not
because they were unequal to the purpose for
which they were conferred, but simply and solely
because they were rejected by those whom God intended
to benefit.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Matth. XXIII, 37; Acts
VII, 51; 1 Cor. X, 13; 2 Cor. VI,
1; 1 Thess. V, 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
(2) Though they did not employ the name, the
Fathers were thoroughly familiar with the notion
of sufficient grace.
</p>

<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>

<p>
Thus St. Irenaeus comments on our Lord's lamentation
over the fate of the Holy City: <q>When He says:
(Matth. XXIII, 37): <q>How often would I have gathered
together thy children, ... and thou wouldest not,</q>
He manifests the ancient liberty of man, because God
hath made him free from the beginning.... For God
does not employ force, but always has a good intention.
And for this reason He gives good counsel to all....
And those who do it [<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax</foreign>] will
receive glory and honor, because they have done good, though
they were free not to do it; but those who do not do
good will experience the just judgment of God, because
they have not done good [<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia inefficax</foreign>],
though they were able to do it
[<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia vere et mere
sufficiens</foreign>].</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra Haer.</hi>, IV,
37, 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Illud autem quod dicit (Matth.
XXIII, 37): Quoties volui colligere
filios tuos, et noluisti, veterem libertatem
hominis manifestat, quia liberum
eum fecit Deus ab initio....
Vis enim a Deo non fit, sed bona
sententia adest illi semper. Et propter
hoc consilium quidem bonum
dat omnibus.... Et qui operantur
quidem illud [gratia efficax], gloriam
et honorem percipient, quoniam operati
sunt bonum, quum possint
non operari illud; hi autem, qui illud
non operantur, indicium iustum
excipient Dei, quoniam non sunt
operati bonum [gratia inefficax],
quum possint operari illud [gratia
vere et mere sufficiens].</foreign></q></note>
St. Augustine is in perfect agreement with ecclesiastical tradition,
and the Jansenists had no right whatever to claim
him for their teaching. <q>The grace of God,</q> he expressly
says in one place, <q>assists the will of men. If
in any case men are not assisted by it, the reason lies with
themselves, not God.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia
Dei ... quae hominum
adiuvat voluntates: qua ut
non adiuventur, in ipsis itidem causa
est, non in Deo.</foreign></q> <hi rend='italic'>De Peccat. Mer.
et Rem.</hi>, II, 17.</note> And again: <q>No one is guilty
because he has not received; but he who does not do what
he ought to do, is truly guilty. It is his duty to act if he
has received a free will and amply sufficient power to
act.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Lib. Arbitr.</hi>, III, 16: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ex
eo quod non accepit, nullus reus
est; ex eo autem quod non facit
quod debet, iuste reus est. Debet
autem [facere], si accepit et voluntatem
liberam et sufficientissimam
facultatem.</foreign></q> On the Jansenist distortions
of St. Augustine's teaching
see Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina
Actuali</hi>, thes. 48. The doctrine of
the Greek Fathers is thoroughly rehearsed
by Isaac Habert, <hi rend='italic'>Theol.
Patr. Graec.</hi>, II, 6 sq.</note>
</p>

<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Readings:</hi>&mdash;St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theologica</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 110, art. 1; qu. 111, art. 1-5.&mdash;J. Scheeben,
<hi rend='italic'>Natur und Gnade</hi>, Mainz
1861.&mdash;M. Glossner, <hi rend='italic'>Lehre des hl. Thomas vom Wesen der
Gnade</hi>, Mainz 1871.&mdash;Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>,
thes. 1-16, Gulpen 1885.&mdash;Oswald, <hi rend='italic'>Die Lehre von der Heiligung</hi>,
3rd ed., § 1-3, Paderborn 1885.&mdash;S. Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Divina</hi>, disp. 1, sect. 2; disp. 3, sect. 1-5, Freiburg
1901.&mdash;Heinrich-Gutberlet,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII, pp. 3 sqq., Mainz 1897.&mdash;B.
J. Otten, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>A Manual of the History of Dogmas</hi>, Vol. II, St.
Louis 1918, pp. 234 sqq.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Properties Of Actual Grace</head>

<p>
Actual grace has three essential properties:
(1) necessity, (2) gratuity, and (3) universality.
The most important of these is necessity.
</p>

<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section 1. The Necessity Of Actual Grace</head>

<p>
In treating of the necessity of actual grace we
must avoid two extremes. The first is that mere
nature is absolutely incapable of doing any thing
good. This error was held by the early Protestants
and the followers of Baius and Jansenius.
The second is that nature is able to perform supernatural
acts by its own power. This was
taught by the Pelagians and Semipelagians.
</p>

<p>
Between these two extremes Catholic theology
keeps the golden mean. It defends the capacity
of human nature against Protestants and Jansenists,
and upholds its incapacity and impotence
against Pelagians and Semipelagians. Thus our
present Section naturally falls into three Articles.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_1_Article_1'/>
<head>Article 1. The Capacity Of Mere Nature Without Grace</head>

<p>
The capacity of nature in its own domain may
be considered with regard either to the intellect
or to the will.
</p>

<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis I: Man is capable by the natural power of
his intellect to arrive at a knowledge of God from a
consideration of the physical universe.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This proposition embodies an article of faith
defined by the Vatican Council: <q>If any one
shall say that the one true God, our Creator and
Lord, cannot be certainly known by the natural
light of human reason through created things,
let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Vat.,</hi>
Sess. III, De Revel., can. 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis dixerit, Deum
unum et verum, Creatorem et
Dominum nostrum, per ea, quae facta
sunt, naturali rationis humanae
lumine certo cognosci non posse,
anathema sit.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
For a formal demonstration of this truth we
must refer the reader to our treatise on <hi rend='italic'>God: His
Knowability, Essence, and Attributes</hi>, pp. 17 sqq.
The argument there given may be supplemented
by the following considerations:
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_1_Article_1_No_1'/>
1. The Vatican Council vindicates the native power of
the human intellect when it says: <q>The Catholic
Church, with one consent, has ever held and does hold,
that there is a twofold order of knowledge, distinct both
in principle and in object: in principle, because our knowledge
in the one is by natural reason, and in the other by
divine faith; in object, because, besides those things to
which natural reason can attain, there are proposed to our
belief mysteries hidden in God, which, unless divinely
revealed, cannot be known.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Vat.</hi>, Sess. III, cap. 4:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hoc quoque perpetuus Ecclesiae
catholicae consensus tenuit et tenet,
duplicem esse ordinem cognitionis,
non solum principio, sed obiecto
etiam distinctum: principio quidem,
quia in altero naturali ratione et
altero fide divinâ cognoscimus; obiecto
autem, quia praeter ea, ad
quae naturalis ratio pertingere potest,
credenda nobis proponuntur mysteria
in Deo abscondita, quae, nisi revelata
divinitus, innotescere non possunt.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 1795.)</note> This teaching, which the
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
Church had repeatedly emphasized on previous occasions
against the scepticism of Nicholas de Ultricuria,<note place='foot'>Nicholas
d'Autricourt, a master
in the University of Paris, in 1348,
was compelled by the Sorbonne and
the Apostolic See to retract a number
of propositions taken from his
writings which were infected with
scepticism. These propositions, most
of which had been censured
as heretical, and some as merely
false, may be found in Natalis
Alexander, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccles.</hi>, ed. Bing.,
XV, 195, and also, with some explanatory
remarks, in Denifle-Chatelain,
<hi rend='italic'>Chartularium Univ. Paris.</hi>, II,
1, Paris 1891.</note> the
rationalistic philosophy of Pomponazzi, the <q>log-stick-and-stone</q>
theory<note place='foot'><q><hi rend='italic'>Klotz-,
Stock- und Steintheorie</hi>.</q></note> of Martin Luther, the exaggerations
of the Jansenists, and the vagaries of the Traditionalists,<note place='foot'>On
Traditionalism, see Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God: His Knowability, Essence,
and Attributes</hi>, pp. 44 sqq.,
2nd ed., St. Louis 1914.</note>
is based on Revelation as well as on sound reason. Holy
Scripture clearly teaches that we can gain a certain
knowledge of God from a consideration of the created
universe.<note place='foot'>Wisd. XIII, 1 sqq.; Rom. I,
20 sq.; Rom. II, 14 sq. Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, pp. 17 sqq.</note>
Reason tells us that a creature endowed with
intelligence must be capable of acquiring natural knowledge,
and that supernatural faith is based on certain
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praeambula</foreign>, which are nothing else than
philosophical and historical truths.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
pp. 38 sqq.</note> <q>The existence of God and
other like truths,</q> says St. Thomas, <q>are not articles of
faith, but preambles to the articles; for faith presupposes
natural knowledge, even as grace presupposes nature, and
perfection something that can be perfected.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol</hi>., 1a, qu. 2, art.
2, ad 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deum esse et alia huiusmodi
... non sunt articuli fidei, sed
praeambula ad articulos; sic enim
fides praesupponit cognitionem naturalem,
sicut gratia naturam et perfectio
perfectibile</foreign>.</q></note> Luther denounced
reason as the most dangerous thing on earth, because
<q>all its discussions and conclusions are as certainly
false and erroneous as there is a God in
Heaven.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Luther's Werke</hi>, ed. Walch,
XII, 400, Halle 1742: <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Alles, was
sie örtert und schleusst, so gewisslich
falsch und irrig ist, als Gott lebt.</foreign></q></note> The
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
Church teaches, in accordance with sound philosophy and
experience, that the original powers of human nature, especially
free-will, though greatly weakened, have not been
destroyed by original sin.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Trid.</hi>, Sess. VI, cap. 1 and canon 5.</note> The Scholastics, it is true,
reckoned ignorance among the four <q>wounds of nature</q>
inflicted by original sin.<note place='foot'>On the <foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>vulnera naturae</foreign> cfr.
Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God the Author of
Nature and the Supernatural</hi>, pp.
298 sqq., St. Louis 1912. Already
St. Augustine observed: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ad
miseriam iustae damnationis pertinet
ignorantia et difficultas, quam
patitur homo ab exordio nativitatis
suae, nec ab isto malo nisi Dei gratiâ
liberatur.</foreign></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Retract.</hi>, I. 9.)</note>
But this teaching must be regarded
in the light in which the Church condemned Quesnel's
proposition that <q>All natural knowledge of God, even
that found in pagan philosophers, can come from nowhere
else than God, and without grace produces nothing but
presumption, vanity, and opposition against God Himself,
instead of adoration, gratitude, and
love.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Propos.</hi> 41:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnis cognitio
Dei etiam naturalis, etiam in philosophis
ethnicis, non potest venire
nisi a Deo; et sine gratia non producit
nisi praesumptionem, vanitatem
et oppositionem ad ipsum Deum loco
affectuum adorationis, gratitudinis
et amoris.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1391.)</note> The Traditionalist
contention that the intrinsic weakness of the human
intellect can be cured only by a primitive revelation
handed down through the instrumentality of speech and
instruction, or by a special interior illumination, involves
the false assumption that there can be a cognitive faculty
incapable of knowledge,&mdash;which would ultimately
lead to a denial of the essential distinction between nature
and the supernatural, because it represents exterior revelation
or interior grace as something positively due to
fallen nature.<note place='foot'>On the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>debitum
naturae</foreign> cfr.
Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God the Author of
Nature and the Supernatural</hi>, pp.
184 sq.</note> Following the lead of St.
Thomas,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 2,
art. 4.</note>
Catholic apologists, while maintaining the necessity of a
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
supernatural revelation even with regard to the truths of
natural religion and ethics, base their argument not on the
alleged physical incapacity of reason to ascertain these
truths, but on the moral impossibility (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> insuperable
difficulty) of finding them unaided. <q>It is to be ascribed
to this divine Revelation,</q> says the Vatican Council, <q>that
such truths among things divine as are not of themselves
beyond human reason, can, even in the present state of
mankind, be known by every one with facility and firm
assurance, and without admixture of error.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Vatic.</hi>, Sess. III, <hi rend='italic'>De
Revel.</hi>, cap. 2: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ut ea, quae in
rebus divinis humanae rationi per
se impervia non sunt, in praesenti
quoque generis humani conditione
ab omnibus expedite, firmâ certitudine
et nullo admixto errore cognosci
possint.</foreign></q></note> In conformity
with the teaching of Revelation and Tradition,
the Church has always sharply distinguished between
πίστις and γνῶσις,&mdash;faith and knowledge, revelation and
philosophy,&mdash;assigning to reason the double rôle of an
indispensable forerunner and a docile handmaid of faith.
Far from antagonizing reason, as charged by her enemies,
the Church has on the contrary always valiantly championed
its rights against Scepticism, Positivism, Criticism,
Traditionalism, Rationalism, Pantheism, and Modernism.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Chastel, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>De la Valeur
de la Raison Humaine</hi>, Paris 1854;
O. Willmann, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Idealismus</hi>,
Vol. III, 2nd ed., pp. 811
sqq., Braunschweig 1908; Bellarmine,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia et Libero Arbitrio</hi>,
V, 1 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. As regards those purely natural truths that constitute
the domain of science and art, Catholic divines are
practically unanimous<note place='foot'>The only dissenting voice is
that of Cardinal Cajetan.</note> in holding that, though man possesses
the physical ability of knowing every single one
of these truths, even the most highly gifted cannot master
them all. Cardinal Mezzofanti had acquired a knowledge
of many languages,<note place='foot'>Mezzofanti spoke perfectly
thirty-eight languages, thirty others
less perfectly, and was more or less
familiar with fifty dialects. Cfr. U.
Benigni in the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic Encyclopedia</hi>,
Vol. X, p. 271.</note> and undoubtedly was capable
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
of learning many more; yet without a special grace he
could not have learned all the languages spoken on earth,
though their number is by no means infinite. The science
of mathematics, which embraces but a limited field of
knowledge, comprises an indefinite number of propositions
and problems which even the greatest genius can not
master. Add to these impediments the shortness of human
life, the limitations of the intellect, the multitude and
intricacy of scientific methods, the inaccessibility of many
objects which are in themselves knowable, (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the
interior of the earth, the stellar universe)&mdash;and you have
a host of limitations which make it physically impossible
for the mind of man to encompass the realm of natural
truths.<note place='foot'>On the question whether grace
can enable a man to acquire an unlimited,
universal knowledge, see
Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>Christology</hi>, pp. 258
sqq., St. Louis 1913. Cfr. also St.
Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu.
109, art. 1, and Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Divina Actuali</hi>, thes. 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis II: Fallen man, whether pagan or sinner, is
able to perform some naturally good works without the
aid of grace.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This thesis may be technically qualified as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>propositio
certa</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. A man performing moral acts may be
either in a state of unbelief, or of mortal sin, or of
sanctifying grace. The question here at issue is
chiefly whether all the works of pagans, that is all
acts done without grace of any kind, are morally
bad, or whether any purely natural works may be
good despite the absence of grace. Baius and Jansenius
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
affirmed this; nay more, they asserted that
no man can perform good works unless he is in
the state of grace and inspired by a perfect love of
God (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caritas</foreign>). If this were true, all the
works of pagans and of such Christians as have lost the
faith, would be so many sins. But it is <emph>not</emph>
true. The genuine teaching of the Church may
be gathered from her official condemnation of
the twenty-fifth, the twenty-sixth, and the thirty-seventh
propositions of Baius. These propositions
run as follows: <q>Without the aid of God's
grace free-will hath power only to sin;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prop.
Baii Damn.</hi>, 27: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Liberum
arbitrium sine gratiae Dei
adiutorio nonnisi ad peccandum
valet.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
1027.)</note> <q>To
admit that there is such a thing as a natural
good, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> one which originates solely in the powers
of nature, is to share the error of
Pelagius;</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prop. Baii Damn.</hi>, 37:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cum
Pelagio sentit, qui boni aliquid
naturalis, i.e. quod ex naturae solis
viribus ortum ducit, agnoscit.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 1037.)</note>
<q>All the actions of unbelievers are sins and the
virtues of philosophers vices.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prop.
Baii Damn.</hi>, 25: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnia
opera infidelium sunt peccata et
philosophorum virtutes sunt vitia.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 1025.)</note> To these we
may add the proposition condemned by Pope
Alexander VIII, that <q>The unbeliever necessarily
sins in whatever he does.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prop. Damn. ab Alex.
VIII</hi>: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Necesse est infidelem in omni
opere peccare.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1298.)</note>
</p>

<p>
1. Sacred Scripture and the Fathers, St. Augustine
included, admit the possibility of performing
naturally good, though unmeritorious,
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
works (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>opera steriliter bona</foreign>) in the state of
unbelief; and their teaching is in perfect conformity
with right reason.
</p>

<p>
a) Our Divine Lord Himself says:<note place='foot'>Matth. V, 46 sq.</note> <q>If you love
them that love you, what reward<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Mercedem</foreign>, μισθόν.</note> shall you have? Do
not even the publicans this? And if you salute<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Salutaveritis</foreign>, ὰσπάσησθε.</note> your
brethren only, what do you more? Do not also the heathens<note place='foot'><foreign
lang='la' rend='italic'>Ethnici</foreign>, οἱ ἐθνικοί.</note>
this?</q> The meaning plainly is: To salute one's
neighbor is an act of charity, a naturally good deed, common
even among the heathens, and one which, not being
done from a supernatural motive, deserves no supernatural
reward. But this does not by any means imply that to
salute one's neighbor is sinful.
</p>

<p>
St. Paul<note place='foot'>Rom. II, 14 sqq.</note> says:
<q>For when the gentiles,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Gentes</foreign>, ἔθνη.</note> who have
not the law,<note place='foot'>That is, the <emph>Mosaic</emph> law.</note>
do by nature<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Naturaliter</foreign>,
φύσει.</note> those things that are of the
law; these having not the law are a law to themselves:
who shew the work of the law written in their hearts.</q>
By <q>gentiles</q> the Apostle evidently means genuine heathens,
not converts from paganism to Christianity, and
hence the meaning of the passage is that the heathens
who know the natural law embodied in the Decalogue only as a
postulate of reason, are by nature<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Naturaliter</foreign>, φύσει.</note> able to <q>do
those things that are of the law,</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Quae legis sunt, faciunt.</foreign></q></note>
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> observe at least
some of its precepts. That St. Paul did not think the
gentiles capable of observing the whole law without the
aid of grace appears from his denunciation of their folly,
a little further up in the same Epistle: <q>Because that,
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
when they knew God, they have not glorified him as
God, or given thanks; but became vain in their
thoughts, and their foolish heart was darkened, etc.,</q><note place='foot'>Rom.
I, 21 sqq.</note> and also from the hypothetic form of Rom. II, 14 in the
original Greek text: <q>Ὅταν γὰρ ἔθνη ... τὰ τοῦ νόμου
ποιῶσιν&mdash;<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si
quando gentes, ... quae legis sunt, faciunt.</foreign></q><note place='foot'>For
other germane texts see
Ezech. XXIX, 18 sqq.; Rom. I, 21.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Rom. XIV, 23: <q>For all that is not faith is sin,</q><note place='foot'>πᾶν
δὲ ὅ οὐκ ἐκ πίστεως, ἁμαρτία ἐστιν.</note>
a text often quoted against our thesis, <q>faith</q> does not
mean the theological habit of faith, but <q>conscience,</q><note place='foot'>πίστις =
συνείδησις.</note> as the context clearly shows.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
also 1 Cor. VIII, 10 sqq.
For a fuller explanation see Scheeben,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatik</hi>, Vol. III, pp. 954
sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) The teaching of the Fathers is in substantial
harmony with Sacred Scripture.
</p>

<p>
α) Thus St. Jerome, speaking of the reward
which Yahweh gave to Nabuchodonosor for his
services against Tyre,<note place='foot'>Ezech. XXIX, 20: <q>And for
the service that he hath done me
against it [the city of Tyre], I have
given him the land of Egypt, because
he hath labored for me, saith
the Lord God.</q></note> says: <q>The fact that
Nabuchodonosor was rewarded for a good work
shows that even the gentiles in the judgment of
God are not passed over without a reward when
they have performed a good deed.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Ezech.</hi>,
XXIX, 20: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ex eo
quod Nabuchodonosor accepit mercedem
boni operis, intelligimus
etiam ethnicos, si quid boni fecerint,
non absque mercede Dei iudicio praeteriri.</foreign></q></note> In his
commentary on St. Paul's Epistle to the Galatians
the same holy Doctor observes: <q>Many who are
without the faith and have not the Gospel of
Christ, yet perform prudent and holy actions,
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> by obeying their parents, succoring the
needy, not oppressing their neighbors, not taking
away the possessions of others.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Gal.</hi>,
I, 15: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Multi absque
fide et evangelio Christi vel sapienter
faciunt aliquid vel sancte, ut parentibus
obsequantur, ut inopi manum
porrigant, non opprimant vicinos,
non aliena diripant.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
β) The teaching of St. Augustine offers some
difficulties. There can be no doubt that this
Father freely admitted that pagans and infidels
can perform naturally good works without faith
and grace. Thus he says there is no man so
wicked that some good cannot be found in him.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Spiritu et Litera</hi>, c. 28:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sicut enim non impediunt a vita
aeterna iustum quaedam peccata
venialia, sine quibus haec vita non
ducitur, sic ad salutem aeternam
nihil prosunt impio aliqua bona
opera, sine quibus difficillime vita
cuiuslibet pessimi hominis invenitur.</foreign></q></note>
He extols the moderation of Polemo<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>,
144, 2.</note> and the purity of Alypius, who were both
pagans.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Confess.</hi>, VI, 10.</note>
He admires the civic virtues of the ancient
Romans,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>, 138,
c. 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus enim
sic ostendit in opulentissimo et praeclaro
imperio Romanorum, quantum
valerent civiles etiam sine verâ religione
virtutes, ut intelligeretur hâc
additâ fieri homines cives alterius
civitatis, cuius rex veritas, cuius lex
caritas, cuius modus aeternitas.</foreign></q></note> etc. Holding such views, how could
Augustine write: <q>Neither doth free-will avail
for anything except sin, if the way of truth is
hidden.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Spiritu et Litera</hi>, c. 3, n. 5:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Neque liberum arbitrium quidquam
nisi ad peccandum valet, si lateat
veritatis via.</foreign></q></note> And what did his disciple Prosper
mean when he said: <q>The whole life of unbelievers
is a sin, and nothing is good without the highest
good. For wherever there is no recognition
of the supreme and immutable truth, there can
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
be no genuine virtue, even if the moral standard
be of the highest.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sent. ex August.</hi>, n. 106:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnis vita infidelium peccatum
est et nihil est bonum sine summo
bono. Ubi enim deest agnitio summae
et incommutabilis veritatis, falsa
virtus est etiam in optimis moribus.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
To understand these and similar passages
rightly and to explain at the same time how it was
possible for Baius and Jansenius to bolster their
heretical systems with quotations from the writings
of St. Augustine and his disciples, it is necessary
to observe that the quondam rhetorician and
Platonic idealist of Hippo delights in applying to
the genus the designation which belongs to
its highest species, and <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>.<note place='foot'>What
Augustine himself observes
of the literary style of St.
Cyprian (<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>, 93, c. 10, n. 39):
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Habet quandam propriam faciem,
quâ possit agnosci</foreign>,</q> applies in an
even truer sense to his own writings.</note> Thus, in
speaking of liberty, he often means the perfect
liberty enjoyed by our first parents in Paradise;<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>Enchirid.</hi>, c. 30.</note>
in using the term <q>children of God</q> he designates
those who persevere in righteousness;<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>De Correptione et Gratia</hi>,
c. 9, n. 20 sqq.</note> and in employing the phrase <q>a good work</q> he means
one supernaturally meritorious. Or, <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>,
he designates the slightest good impulse of the
will as <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caritas</foreign>,</q>
as it were by anticipation, and brands every unmeritorious work
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>opus informe s. sterile</foreign>)
as false virtue (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>falsa virtus</foreign>), nay sin
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>peccatum</foreign>). To interpret St.
Augustine correctly,
therefore, allowance must be made for his
peculiar idealism and a careful distinction drawn
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
between the real and the metaphorical sense of
the terms which he employs. Baius neglected
this precaution and furthermore paid no attention
to the controversial attitude of the holy Doctor.
Augustine's peculiar task was not to maintain the
possibility of naturally good works without faith
and grace, but to defend against Pelagius and
Julian the impossibility of performing supernaturally
good and meritorious works without
the aid of grace. It is this essential difference in
their respective points of view that explains how
St. Augustine and Baius were able to employ
identical or similar terms to express radically different
ideas.<note place='foot'>For a fuller and more adequate
treatment of this question see J.
Ernst, <hi rend='italic'>Werke und Tugenden der Ungläubigen
nach Augustinus</hi>, Freiburg
1871; Ripalda, <hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernaturali</hi>,
t. III, Cologne 1648; S.
Dechamps, <hi rend='italic'>De Haeresi Ianseniana</hi>,
Paris 1645; and, more briefly, Palmieri,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>,
thes. 21.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) It can easily be demonstrated on theological
grounds that fallen man is able, of his own initiative,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> without the aid of grace, to perform
morally good works, and that Baius erred in asserting
that this is impossible without theological
faith.
</p>

<p>
α) With regard to the first-mentioned point it will be
well, for the sake of clearness, to adopt Palmieri's distinction
between physical and moral capacity.<note place='foot'>Palmieri,
<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>, thes. 20. Concerning
the effects of original sin
on free-will, see Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God
the Author of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 291 sq.</note> Man
sins whenever he transgresses the law or yields to temptation.
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
This would be impossible if he were physically
unable to keep the whole law and resist temptation.
Hence he must be physically able to do that which
he is obliged to do under pain of sin, though in this or
that individual instance the difficulties may be insuperable
without the aid of grace. To put it somewhat differently:
Baius and Jansenius hold that fallen man can
perform no morally good works because of physical or
moral impotence on the part of the will. This assumption
is false. Man is physically able to perform good
works because they are enjoined by the moral law of
nature under pain of sin; he is morally able because, in
spite of numerous evil tendencies, not a few gentiles and
unbelievers have led upright lives and thereby proved
that man can perform good works without the aid of
grace.<note place='foot'>On this distinction see <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> sqq.</note>
This is also the teaching of St. Thomas.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 2a 2ae, qu. 10,
art. 4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Bona opera, ad quae sufficit
bonum naturae, aliqualiter
operari possunt [infideles]. Unde
non oportet quod in omni suo opere
peccent; sed quandocunque aliquod
opus operantur ex infidelitate, tunc
peccant.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
β) It is an expressly defined dogma that the process
of justification starts with theological faith
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides</foreign>), preceded
by the so-called grace of vocation, which prepares
and effects conversion. To say, as Baius did, that
all good works performed in a state of unbelief are so
many sins, is tantamount to asserting that the preliminary
acts leading up to faith, and which the unbeliever performs
by the aid of prevenient grace, are sinful; in other
words, that God requires the unbeliever to prepare himself
for justification by committing sin. This is as absurd
as it is heretical.<note place='foot'>Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess.
VI, can. 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis dixerit, opera
omnia quae ante iustificationem
fiunt, quacunque ratione facta sint,
vere esse peccata vel odium Dei
mereri, aut quanto vehementius quis
nititur se disponere ad gratiam, tanto
eum gravius peccare, anathema sit.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 817.)</note>
</p>

<p>
The whole argument of this section applies
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a fortiori</foreign> to
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
the theory that no act can be morally good unless
prompted by both theological charity and theological
faith.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. infra</hi>, No.
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_1_Article_1_No_3'>3</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. We must now define the limitations of fallen
nature unaided by grace. Though the graces dispensed
by Providence even for naturally good
deeds are in the present economy
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de facto</foreign> nearly
all supernatural, nothing prevents us from conceiving
a different economy, consisting of purely
natural helps, such as would have been necessary
in the state of pure nature.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 226 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
As regards the limitations of man's moral power in
the natural order, we may say, in a general way, that the
will is able to keep the easier precepts of the moral law
of nature without the assistance of grace (either supernatural
or natural). However, as it is impossible in
many instances to determine just where the easier precepts
end and the more difficult ones begin, a broad field is
left open for theological speculation.
</p>

<p>
a) Theologians are practically unanimous in
holding that man cannot observe the natural law
in its entirety for any considerable length of time
without the aid of grace.
</p>

<p>
Suarez is so sure of this that he does not hesitate to
denounce the contrary teaching,&mdash;which is (perhaps unjustly)
ascribed to Durandus, Scotus, and Gabriel Biel&mdash;as
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
<q>rash and verging on error.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Propositio temeraria et errori
proxima.</foreign></q></note> In matter of fact the
Church has formally defined that, because of concupiscence,
no one, not even the justified man, much less the
sinner, is able, without divine assistance (grace), to keep
for any considerable length of time the whole Decalogue,
which embodies the essentials of the moral law. <q>Nevertheless,</q>
says the Council of Trent, <q>let those who think
themselves to stand take heed lest they fall, and with
fear and trembling work out their salvation, ... for ...
they ought to fear for the combat which yet remains with
the flesh, with the world, with the devil, wherein they
cannot be victorious unless they be with God's grace
obedient to the Apostle, who says: <q>We are debtors,
etc.</q></q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trid.</hi>, Sess. VI, cap. 13:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Verumtamen qui se existimant
stare, videant ne cadant, et cum
timore ac tremore salutem suam
operentur.... Formidare enim debent ...
de pugna, quae superest
cum carne, cum mundo, cum diabolo,
in qua victores esse non possunt,
nisi cum Dei gratiâ Apostolo obtemperent
dicenti: Debitores etc.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 806.)</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Paul, who lived, so to speak, in an atmosphere of
grace, yet found reason to exclaim: <q>I am delighted
with the law of God, according to the inward man, but I
see another law in my members, fighting against the law of
my mind, and captivating me in the law of sin, that
is in my members,</q><note place='foot'>Rom. VII, 22 sqq.</note>
and: <q>Unhappy man that I
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
The grace of God, by Jesus Christ our Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Rom.
VII, 24 sq.</note> Surely
it would be vain to expect the proud ideal of the Stoics
or Pelagius' presumptuous claim of impeccability ever
to be realized on earth except by a special privilege of
grace, such as that bestowed upon the Blessed Virgin
Mary.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>Mariology</hi>,
pp. 80 sqq., St. Louis 1914.</note>
</p>

<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>

<p>
The Fathers follow St. Paul in describing the power
of concupiscence, even after justification.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 109, art. 5; Heinrich-Gutberlet,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>,
Vol. VIII, § 416, Mainz 1897.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) A pertinent question, closely allied to the
proposition just treated, is this: Can the human
will, without the aid of grace, overcome all the
grievous temptations to mortal sin by which it is
besieged?
</p>

<p>
It is the common teaching of theologians that, without
the aid of grace, man in the fallen state succumbs with
moral (not physical) necessity to grievous temptations
against the moral law, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> to mortal sin. This conclusion
flows from the impossibility, which we have demonstrated
above, of observing the whole law of nature for
life or for any considerable length of time without the
help of grace. If man were able to resist all violent
temptations, he would be able to keep the whole law.
</p>

<p>
The theological teaching which we are here expounding
may be formulated in two different ways: (1) No
man can overcome all grievous temptations against the
moral law without the aid of grace; (2) there is no man
living who is not now and then assailed by temptations
to which he would inevitably succumb did not God lend
him His assistance.
</p>

<p>
In its first and rather indefinite form the proposition
is attacked by Ripalda,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Ente Supernaturali</hi>, disp.
114, sect. 18.</note> Molina,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Concord.</hi>,
art. 13, disp. 19.</note> and many later Scholastics.
These writers argue as follows: It is impossible
to deduce from Revelation or experience a definite
rule by which man could determine the conditions on
which the grievousness of a temptation depends. To
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
say that a temptation is grievous when it cannot be resisted
without the aid of grace, would be begging the
question. Besides, the possibility always remains that
there be men who, though in theory unable to withstand
all grievous temptations without the aid of grace,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de facto</foreign>
never meet with such temptations, but only with
the lighter kind which can be overcome without supernatural
help.
</p>

<p>
The second and more specific formulation of our proposition
is supported by Sacred Scripture, which explicitly
declares that all men are subject to temptations which
they could not resist if God did not uphold them.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Chr. Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelect. Dogmat.</hi>,
Vol. V, pp. 87 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
If the just are obliged to watch and pray constantly,
lest they fall,<note place='foot'>Cfr. the following passage from
the Tridentine Council: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... cum
timore ac tremore salutem suam
operentur in laboribus, in vigiliis, in
eleemosynis, in orationibus et oblationibus,
in ieiuniis et castitate.</foreign></q></note> this must be true in an even higher degree
of sinners and unbelievers. St. Augustine writes against
the Pelagians: <q>Faithful men say in their prayer:
<q>Lead us not into temptation.</q> But if they have the
capacity [of avoiding evil], why do they pray [for it]?
Or, what is the evil which they pray to be delivered from,
but, above all else, the body of this death?... the carnal
lusts, whence a man is liberated only by the grace of the
Saviour.... He may be permitted to pray that he may
be healed. Why does he presume so strongly on the
capability of his nature? It is wounded, hurt, harassed,
destroyed; what it stands in need of is a true confession
[of its weakness], not a false defense [of its
capacity].</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Natura et Gratia</hi>, c. 48, n.
62: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fideles enim orantes dicunt:
Ne nos inferas in tentationem. Si
adest possibilitas, ut quid orant?
Aut a quo malo se liberari orant
nisi maxime de corpore mortis
huius?... de vitiis carnalibus,
unde non liberatur homo sine gratiâ
Salvatoris.... Orare sinatur, ut
sanetur. Quid tantum de naturae
possibilitate praesumitur? Vulnerata,
sauciata, vexata, perdita est; verâ
confessione, non falsâ defensione
opus habet.</foreign></q> The necessity of grace,
and of prayer to obtain grace, is admirably
and exhaustively treated by
Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Necessitate Gratiae</hi>, I, 23,
sqq. Cfr. also Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
et Libero Arbitrio</hi>, V, 7 sqq.</note>
</p>

<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>

<p>
c) Another question, on which Catholic divines
disagree, is this: Can fallen man, unaided by
grace, elicit an act of perfect natural charity
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>amor Dei naturalis perfectus</foreign>)?
</p>

<p>
Scotus answers this question affirmatively,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment.
in Quatuor Libros
Sent.</hi>, III, dist. 27, qu. unica:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ratio recta docet, solum summum
bonum infinitum esse summe diligendum
et per consequens voluntas hoc
potest ex puris naturalibus; nihil
enim potest intellectus recte dictare,
in quod dictatum non possit voluntas
rationalis naturaliter tendere.</foreign></q></note> and his
opinion is shared by Cajetan,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment. in
Summam Theol.
S. Thomae Aqu.</hi>, 2a 2ae, qu. 171,
art. 2.</note> Bañez,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment. in Summam Theol.
S. Thomae Aqu.</hi>, 2a 2ae, qu. 24, art.
2.</note> Dominicus Soto,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Natura et Gratia</hi>,
I, 21.</note> and Molina.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Concord.</hi>, qu. 14,
art. 13, disp. 14.</note> Other equally eminent theologians, notably
Suarez<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, I, 33.</note>
and Bellarmine,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Gratia et Libero Arbitrio</hi>,
VI, 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Existimamus non posse
Deum sine ope ipsius diligi neque ut
auctorem naturae neque ut largitorem
gratiae et gloriae, neque perfecte
neque imperfecte ullo modo,
... quicquid aliqui minus considerate
in hac parte scripserint.</foreign></q> On
the attitude of St. Thomas (<hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 109, art. 3) cfr.
Billuart, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, diss. 3, art. 4.</note>
take the negative side.
</p>

<p>
In order to obtain a clear understanding of the question
at issue we shall have to attend to several distinctions.
</p>

<p>
First and above all we must not lose sight of the important
distinction between the <emph>natural</emph> and the <emph>supernatural</emph>
love of God. Supernatural charity, in all its
stages, necessarily supposes supernatural aid. The question
therefore can refer only to the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>amor Dei naturalis</foreign>.<note place='foot'>It
is not true, as Bellarmine
argues, that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>amor Dei naturalis</foreign>
at its highest would result in justification.</note>
That this natural charity is no mere figment appears
from the ecclesiastical condemnation of two propositions
of Baius.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prop. Baii
Damn.</hi>, 34: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Distinctio
illa duplicis amoris, naturalis
videlicet, quo Deus amatur ut auctor
naturae, et gratuiti, quo Deus amatur
ut beatificator, vana est et commentitia.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
1034).&mdash;36: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Amor naturalis, qui
ex viribus naturae exoritur, ex sola
philosophia per elationem praesumptionis
humanae cum iniuria crucis
Christi defenditur a nonnullis doctoribus.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
1036.)</note>
</p>

<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>

<p>
Another, even more important distinction is that between
<emph>perfect</emph> and <emph>imperfect</emph> charity. Imperfect charity is
the love of God as our highest good (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>amor Dei ut
summum bonum nobis</foreign>); perfect charity is the love of
God for His own sake above all things (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>amor Dei
propter se et super omnia</foreign>). The holy Fathers and a
number of councils<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cfr. Conc.
Arausic.</hi> II, a. 529,
can. 25: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Prorsus donum Dei est
diligere Deum.</foreign></q></note> declare that it is impossible to love
God perfectly without the aid of grace. The context
and such stereotyped explanatory phrases as <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sicut
oportet</foreign></q> or <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sicut expedit ad
salutem</foreign>,</q><note place='foot'>Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trid.</hi>,
Sess. VI, can. 3.</note> show that these
Patristic and conciliary utterances apply to the <emph>supernatural</emph>
love of God. Hence the question narrows itself
down to this: Can fallen man without the aid of grace
love God for His own sake and above all things by a
purely natural love? In answering this question
Pesch,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Praelect. Dogm.</hi>, Vol. V, pp. 73
sqq.</note> Tepe,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Instit. Theolog.</hi>,
Vol. III, pp. 19 sqq.</note> and other theologians distinguish between
<emph>affective</emph> and <emph>effective</emph> love. They hold that whereas the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>amor affectivus</foreign>
in all its stages is possible without the aid of grace, not so the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>amor effectivus</foreign>, since that would involve
the observance of the whole natural law. This compromise
theory can be demonstrated as highly probable
from Scripture and Tradition. St. Paul says<note place='foot'>Rom. I, 21.</note> that the
gentiles knew God and should have glorified Him. This
evidently supposes that it was possible for them to glorify
God, and consequently to love Him affectively, as
easily and with the same means by which they knew Him.
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
Else how could the Apostle say of those gentiles who,
<q>when they knew God, glorified him not as God,</q> that they
<q>changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and
served the creature rather than the Creator</q>?<note place='foot'>Rom. I, 25.</note> This
interpretation of Rom. I, 21 sqq. is explicitly confirmed by
St. Ambrose when he says: <q>For they were able to apprehend
this by the law of nature, inasmuch as the fabric
of the cosmos testifies that God, its author, is alone to be
loved, as Moses hath set it down in his writings; but they
were made impious by not glorifying God, and unrighteousness
became evident in them when, knowing, they
changed the truth into a lie and refused to confess the
one God.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Epist. ad Roman.</hi>, I, 18:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Potuerunt enim id per legem naturae
apprehendere, fabricâ mundi
testificante auctorem Deum solum
diligendum, quod Moyses literis
tradidit; sed impii facti sunt non
colendo Creatorem et iniustitia in
eis apparet, dum videntes dissimulabant
a veritate, non fatentes unum
Deum.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_1_Article_1_No_3'/>
3. It follows, by way of corollary, that Vasquez's
opinion,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment. in Summam Theol.
S. Thomae Aqu.</hi>, 1a 2ae, disp. 189 sq.</note> that there can be no good work
without supernatural aid in the shape of a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cogitatio
congrua</foreign>, is untenable, as is also the assertion
of Ripalda<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernaturali</hi>,
disp. 20.</note> that in the present economy purely
natural good actions are so invariably connected
with the prevenient grace of Christ that they
practically never exist as such.
</p>

<p>
a) Vasquez, whose position in the matter is opposed
by most other theologians, contends<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op.
cit.</hi></note> that no man
can perform a good work or resist any temptation against
the natural law (Decalogue) without the help of supernatural
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
grace derived from the merits of Christ. To
avoid the heretical extreme of Baianism, however, he
makes a twofold limitation. He assumes with the Scotists
that there is such a thing as a morally indifferent act
of the will,<note place='foot'>To admit the possibility of true
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actus humani</foreign> that are neither good
nor bad, but ethically indifferent, is
to escape the error of Baius that
<q>Free-will without the aid of divine
grace avails for nothing but
sin.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Prop. Damn.</hi>, 27.)</note>
and defines the grace which he holds to be
necessary for the performance of every morally good
deed, as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cogitatio congrua</foreign>.
This <q>congruous thought,</q>
he says, is in itself, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> ontologically, natural, and can be
regarded as supernatural only <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quoad
modum et finem</foreign>.
The subtle argument by which Vasquez tries to establish
this thesis is based principally on St. Augustine and may
be summarized as follows: Whenever the Fathers and
councils insist on the necessity of grace for the performance
of good works, they mean <emph>all</emph> good works, natural as
well as supernatural. The only alternative they know
is virtue or vice, good or evil. Consequently the grace of
Christ, in some form or other, is a necessary requisite of
all morally good deeds.
</p>

<p>
As we have already intimated, we regard this opinion
of the learned Spanish divine as erroneous.<note place='foot'>We
should not, however, apply
the ecclesiastical censures pronounced
against Baius to the writings
of Vasquez. This, as Schiffini convincingly
shows (<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>,
pp. 159 sqq.), would be an injustice.</note> Three
solid reasons militate against it. The first is that, to
guard against Baianism, Vasquez is compelled to assume
the existence of morally indifferent acts of the will,
which is untenable, as <q>St. Augustine and St. Thomas,
and theologians generally teach that there is no such
thing in the concrete as a morally indifferent act of the
free will, and consequently, if the will is able, without
grace, to perform acts that are not evil, it is also able
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
to perform good acts.</q><note place='foot'>Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>,
I, 8, 46: <q>... <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quia secundum Augustini et
divi Thomae sententiam communis
a theologis probatam non datur in
voluntate libere operante actus indifferens
in individuo, et ideo iuxta
veram theologiam recte sequitur, si
liberum arbitrium potest sine gratia
non male operari, posse etiam bene.</foreign></q></note> Second, Vasquez's theory
counterfeits the notion of Christian grace. <q>Good
thoughts</q> come so natural to man, and are so closely
bound up with the grace of creation, that even Pelagius found no difficulty in
admitting this sort of <q>grace.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi>,
p. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>.</note>
Surely fallen nature is not so utterly corrupt that a good
child is unable to honor and love his parents without the
aid of <q>grace</q> (in the sense of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cogitatio congrua ex
meritis Christi</foreign>). The third reason which constrains us
to reject Vasquez's theory, is that it leaves no room for
natural morality (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>naturaliter honestum</foreign>)
to fill the void between those acts that are naturally bad
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>moraliter inhonesta</foreign>,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>peccata</foreign>)
and such as are supernaturally good
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>supernaturaliter bona</foreign>,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>salutaria</foreign>).
The existence of such naturally good acts would seem to be a highly
probable inference from the condemnation, by Pius VI, of
a certain proposition taught by the pseudo-Council of
Pistoia.<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quâ vero parte inter
dominantem cupiditatem et caritatem
dominantem nulli ponuntur affectus
medii, a natura ipsa insiti suapteque
naturâ laudabiles ... falsa, alias
damnata.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
1524.)</note>
</p>

<p>
b) Martinez de Ripalda (+1648) tried to improve
Vasquez's theory by restoring the Christian concept of
grace and adding that Providence invariably precedes all
naturally good works, including those performed by
heathens and sinners, with the entitatively supernatural
grace of illumination and confirmation.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Ente Supernaturali</hi>, disp. 20,
sect. 2: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quotiescunque homo agit
quod sibi datum est, ut actum virtutis
naturalem efficiat, iam adesse
antecedenter Deum auxilio intrinsece
supernaturali gratiae, ... ita [ut]
nullus sit conatus moraliter bonus
naturae, quem aliqua gratia supernaturalis
non praeveniat.</foreign></q></note> In this hypothesis
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
the necessity of grace is not theological but purely
historic.<note place='foot'>This must be kept in mind in
judging Ripalda's famous thesis:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ad quodlibet bonum opus morale
sive ad quemlibet virtutis moralis
actum necessarium esse per se
naturae rationali elevatae auxilium
theologicum gratiae.</foreign></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, sect.
3.)</note>
</p>

<p>
Despite the wealth of arguments by which Ripalda attempted
to prove his theory,<note place='foot'>He urges the supernatural character,
in principle, of the present economy of salvation; the practical
identity of the naturally good with the supernaturally salutary acts of
the will, which he claims is taught in Sacred Scripture (cfr. Acts XIV,
14 sqq.; Rom. I, 19 sqq.), and also by St. Augustine and his disciples
Prosper and Orosius; the merciful dispensation of grace towards heathens,
unbelievers, and sinners (<hi rend='italic'>v.
infra</hi>, <ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_2'>Sect. 3, Art. 2</ref>);
the universal belief of Christians in the salutary effects of all good works, including
those of the purely natural order, etc. For a discussion of these arguments
consult Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>, pp. 254 sqq.</note>
it has not been generally accepted. While some, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>
Platel<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Synopsis de Gratia</hi>, n.
530.</note> and Pesch,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Praelect. Dogmat.</hi>,
Vol. V, p. 72.</note> regard it with a degree of sympathy, others,
notably De Lugo<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Virtute Fidei Divinae</hi>, disp.
12, sect. 2.</note>
and Tepe,<note place='foot'> <hi rend='italic'>Instit. Theolog.</hi>, Vol. III, pp.
22 sq., 248 sqq.</note> are strongly opposed to it. Palmieri thinks
it may be accepted in a restricted sense, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> when limited
to the faithful.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Div. Actuali</hi>, p. 268:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si tamen ad solos fideles coarctetur,
quum nulla argumenta obstent
et pro hac hypothesi maxime valeant
rationes Ripaldae, eam censemus
veram esse.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
Ripalda's hypothesis of the universality of grace is truly
sublime and would have to be accepted if God's salvific
will could be demonstrated by revelation or some historic
law to suffer no exceptions. But Ripalda has not been
able to prove this from Revelation.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_1_Article_1_No_1'>No. 1</ref>.</note> Then, too,
his theory entails two extremely objectionable conclusions:
(1) a denial, not indeed of the possibility (Quesnel), but
of the existence of purely natural good works, and (2) the
possibility of justification without theological faith.
Neither of these difficulties probably occurred to Vasquez
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
or Ripalda,<note place='foot'>Cfr. Mazzella, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Christi</hi>, disp. 2, art. 9.</note> because at the time when they wrote Pius
VI had not yet condemned the teaching of the pseudo-Council
of Pistoia,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>, p.
<ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>.</note> nor had Innocent XI censured the
proposition that <q>Faith in a broad sense, as derived from
the testimony of creatures or some other similar motive,
is sufficient for justification.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Fides late dicta ex testimonio
creaturarum similive motivo ad iustificationem
sufficit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1173.)</note> If the love of God,
even perfect love, (such as we have shown to be possible
in the natural order), were of itself necessarily supernatural,
as Ripalda contends, it would be possible for a
pagan to receive the grace of justification without theological
faith, which he does not possess, as is evident from
the Vatican teaching that it is <q>requisite for divine faith
that revealed truth be believed because of the authority of
God who reveals it.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Vat.</hi>, Sess. III,
De Fide, can. 2: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis dixerit, ... ad
fidem divinam non requiri, ut revelata
veritas propter auctoritatem Dei
revelantis credatur, anathema sit.</foreign></q>
On this whole dispute cfr. Schiffini,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 156 sqq. The
arguments adduced by the defenders
of Ripalda's opinion can be studied
in Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>,
pp. 265 sqq. Cfr. also Scheeben,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatik</hi>, Vol. III, pp. 996 sqq. A
difficulty arises from the twenty-second
canon of the Second Council
of Orange (A. D. 529): <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nemo
habet de suo nisi mendacium et
peccatum.</foreign></q> But this canon was
probably never approved by the Holy
See. It is ably discussed by Gutberlet
in his continuation of Heinrich's
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>, Vol.
VIII, § 415.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis III: Not all actions performed by man in
the state of mortal sin are sinful on account of his not
being in the state of grace.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de fide</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. Though this thesis is, strictly speaking,
included in Thesis II, it must be demonstrated
separately on its own merits, because it embodies
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
a formally defined dogma which has been denied
by the Protestant Reformers and by the followers
of Baius and Jansenius. Martin Luther taught,&mdash;and
his teaching was adopted in a modified
form by the Calvinists,&mdash;that human nature is
entirely depraved by original sin, and consequently
man necessarily sins in whatever he
does,<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ex viribus suis [natura]
coram Deo nihil nisi peccare potest.</foreign></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Solida Declar.</hi>, I, § 22.) Cfr. J. A.
Möhler, <hi rend='italic'>Symbolik</hi>, § 6-7 (English tr.
by J. B. Robertson, <hi rend='italic'>Symbolism</hi>, 5th
ed., London 1906, pp. 54 sqq.)</note> even in the process of justification.
Against this heresy the Tridentine Council defined:
<q>If any one shall say that all the works
done before justification ... are indeed sins, ...
let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trid.</hi>,
Sess. VI, can. 7:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis dixerit, opera omnia, quae
ante iustificationem fiunt, ... vere
esse peccata, ... anathema sit.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
The Protestant notion of grace was reduced
to a theological system by Baius<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God the
Author of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>, pp. 183 sqq.,
<hi rend='italic'>et passim</hi>.</note> and Jansenius,<note place='foot'>A. D.
1585-1638. Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, pp. 223 sqq.</note>
whose numerous errors may all be traced to
their denial of the supernatural order.
</p>

<p>
The Jansenist teaching was pushed to an extreme by
Paschasius Quesnel, 101 of whose propositions were
formally condemned by Pope Clement XI in his famous
Constitution <q><hi rend='italic'>Unigenitus</hi>.</q><note place='foot'>On
this important document (issued A. D. 1713) see A. Schill,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Konstitution Unigenitus</hi>, Freiburg
1876; Thuillier, <hi rend='italic'>La Seconde
Phase du Jansénisme</hi>, Paris 1901;
M. Ott, art. <q>Unigenitus</q> in Vol.
XV of the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic Encyclopedia</hi>.</note> The Jansenistic teachings
of the Council of Pistoia were censured by Pius VI, A. D.
1794, in his Bull <q><hi rend='italic'>Auctorem fidei</hi>.</q> The quintessence
of this heretical system is embodied in the proposition
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
that whatever a man does in the state of mortal sin is
necessarily sinful for the reason that he is not in the state
of grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>status caritatis</foreign>).
Baius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prop. Damn.</hi>, 38.</note>
and Quesnel<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prop. Damn.</hi>, 44.</note> gave
this teaching an Augustinian turn by saying that there is
no intermediate state between the love of God and concupiscence,
and that all the works of a sinner must consequently
and of necessity be sinful. This heretical teaching is sharply condemned in
the Bull <q><hi rend='italic'>Auctorem fidei</hi>.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign
lang='la' rend='italic'>Doctrina synodi de duplici
amore enuntians, hominem sine
gratia esse sub virtute peccati ipsumque
in eo statu per generalem cupiditatis
dominantis influxum omnes suas
actiones inficere et corrumpere&mdash;quatenus
insinuat, in homine, dum
est sub servitute sive in statu peccati, ...
sic dominari cupiditatem
ut per generalem huius influxum
omnes illius actiones in se inficiantur
et corrumpantur, aut opera omnia
quae ante iustificationem fiunt,
quacunque ratione fiant, sint peccata,
quasi in omnibus suis actibus peccator
serviat dominanti cupiditati:
falsa, perniciosa, inducens in errorem
a Tridentino damnatum ut haereticum,
iterum in Baio damnatum art.
40.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
1523).</note>
Quesnel pushed it to its last revolting conclusion when he
said: <q>The prayer of the wicked is a new sin, and that
God permits it is but an additional judgment upon
them.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prop. Damn.</hi>,
59: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Oratio
impiorum est novum peccatum, et
quod Deus illis concedit, est novum
in eos iudicium.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1409.)</note>
</p>

<p>
The teaching of Baius and Quesnel is repugnant
to Revelation and to the doctrine of
the Fathers.
</p>

<p>
a) The Bible again and again exhorts sinners
to repent, to pray for forgiveness, to give alms,
etc. Cfr. Ecclus. XXI, 1: <q>My son, thou hast
sinned? Do so no more: but for thy former sins
also pray that they may be forgiven thee.</q>
Ezech. XVIII, 30: <q>Be converted, and do penance
for all your iniquities: and iniquity shall not
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
be your ruin.</q> Dan. IV, 24: <q>Redeem thou thy
sins with alms, and thy iniquities with works of
mercy to the poor: perhaps he will forgive thy
offences.</q> Zach. I, 3: <q>Thus saith the Lord of
hosts: Turn ye to me, saith the Lord of hosts:
and I will turn to you.</q> If all the works thus enjoined
were but so many sins, we should be
forced to conclude, on the authority of Sacred
Scripture, that God commands the sinner to commit
new iniquities and that the process of justification
with its so-called dispositions consists
in a series of sinful acts. Such an assumption
would be manifestly absurd and blasphemous.
</p>

<p>
Quesnel endeavored to support his heretical conceit by
Matth. VII, 17 sq.: <q>Even so every good tree bringeth
forth good fruit, and the evil tree bringeth forth evil
fruit; a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can
an evil tree bring forth good fruit.</q> But as our Lord in
this passage speaks of prophets, the fruits he has in
mind must obviously be doctrines not works.<note place='foot'>This passage, and the
meaning it evidently bears in the context of
St. Matthew's Gospel, is thoroughly
discussed by Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, I,
4. Cfr. also J. B. Faure, <hi rend='italic'>Notae
in Enchiridion S. August.</hi>, c. 15.
Other Scriptural texts distorted by
the Jansenists are quoted and explained
in their true sense by Scheeben,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatik</hi>, Vol. III, pp. 923 sqq.</note> And
what if they were works? Are not doctrines and morals
ultimately related, and may we not infer from the lives
they lead (according to their doctrines) whether prophets
are true or false? By their fruits (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> works) you
shall know them (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the soundness or unsoundness of
the teaching upon which their works are based).
</p>

<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>

<p>
b) In appealing to the testimony of the Fathers
the Jansenists were notoriously guilty of misinterpretation.
</p>

<p>
α) Origen plainly teaches that prayer before justification
is a good work. <q>Though you are sinners,</q> he says,
<q>pray to God; God hears the sinners.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom.
in Is.</hi>, 5, n. 2.</note> The seemingly
contradictory text John IX, 31: <q>Now we know that
God doth not hear sinners,</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Scimus autem quia peccatores
Deus non audit.</foreign></q></note> is thus explained by
St. Augustine: <q>He speaks as one not yet anointed; for
God also hears the sinners. If He did not hear sinners,
the publican would have cast his eyes to the ground in
vain and vainly struck his breast saying: O God, be
merciful to me, a sinner.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Tract. in Ioa.</hi>,
44, n. 13:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Adhuc inunctus loquitur; nam et
peccatores exaudit Deus. Si enim
peccatores Deus non exaudiret, frustra
ille publicanus oculos in terram
demittens et pectus suum percutiens
diceret: Domine, propitius esto mihi
peccatori [Luc. XVIII, 13].</foreign></q></note> Moreover, since there is
question here of extraordinary works and signs only (<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>
miracles), the text is wholly irrelevant in regard to works
of personal righteousness. St. Prosper teaches: <q>Human
nature, created by God, even after its prevarication,
retains its substance, form, life, senses, and reason,
and the other goods of body and soul, which are not lacking
even to those who are bad and vicious. But there
is no possibility of seizing the true good by such things as
may adorn this mortal life, but cannot give [merit]
eternal life.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contr.
Collat.</hi>, n. 36: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Naturae
humanae, cuius creator est
Deus, etiam post praevaricationem
manet substantia, manet forma,
manet vita et sensus et ratio ceteraque
corporis et animi bona, quae
etiam malis vitiosisque non desunt.
Sed non illis veri boni perceptio est,
quae mortalem vitam honestare possunt,
aeternam conferre non possunt.</foreign></q>
For additional Patristic texts
in confirmation of our thesis see
Ripalda, <hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernaturali</hi>, t.
III, disp. 20, sect. 4.</note>
</p>

<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>

<p>
β) Baius and Quesnel succeeded in veiling their
heresy by a phraseology of Augustinian color but with
implications foreign to the mind of the Doctor of Grace.
Augustine emphasized the opposition between <q>charity</q>
and <q>concupiscence</q> so strongly that the intermediary
domain of naturally good works was almost lost to view.
Thus he says in his <hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>: <q>Carnal lust reigns
where there is not the love of God.</q><note
place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>, c. 117, n. 31:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Regnat carnalis cupiditas, ubi non
est Dei caritas.</foreign></q></note> And in his treatise
on the Grace of Christ: <q>Here there is no love, no
good work is reckoned as done, nor is there in fact any
good work, rightly so called; because whatever is not of
faith is sin, and faith worketh by love.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Christi</hi>, c. 26:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ubi non est dilectio, nullum bonum
opus imputatur, non recte bonum
opus vocatur, quia omne quod non
est ex fide peccatum est et fides per
dilectionem operatur.</foreign></q></note> And again in
his treatise on Grace and Free Will: <q>The commandments
of love or charity are so great and such, that whatever
action a man may think he does well, is by no means
well done if done without charity.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia et Libero Arbitrìo</hi>,
c. 18: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Praecepta dilectionis, i.e.
caritatis, tanta et talia sunt, ut quidquid
se putaverit homo facere bene,
si fiat sine caritate, nullo modo fiat
bene.</foreign></q></note> We have purposely
chosen passages in which the <q>Doctor of
Grace</q> obviously treats of charity as theological love, not
in the broad sense of
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>dilectio</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>.</note> At first blush these
passages seem to agree with the teaching of Baius, who
says: <q>Every love on the part of a rational creature is
either sinful cupidity, by which the world is loved, and
which is forbidden by St. John, or that praiseworthy
charity which is infused into the heart by the Holy Spirit,
and by which we love God;</q>&mdash;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Proposit.
Baii Damn.</hi>, 38:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnis amor creaturae rationalis
aut vitiosa est cupiditas quâ mundus
diligitur, quae a Ioanne prohibetur,
aut laudabilis caritas quâ per Spiritum
Sanctum in corde diffusa Deus
amatur.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
1038.)</note> and with the forty-fifth
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
proposition of Quesnel: <q>As the love of God no
longer reigns in the hearts of sinners, it is necessary that carnal lust should reign
in them and vitiate all their actions.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prop.
Quesnelli Damn.</hi>, 45:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Amore Dei in corde peccatorum
non amplius regnante necesse est,
ut in eo carnalis regnet cupiditas
omnesque actiones eius corrumpat.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 1395.)</note>
Yet the sense of these propositions is anything
but Augustinian. Augustine upholds free-will in
spite of grace and concupiscence, whereas the Jansenists
assert that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>carnalis cupiditas</foreign>
and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caritas dominans</foreign>
produce their effects by the very power of nature, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
necessarily and of themselves.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Infra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_III_Section_1'>Ch. III, Sect. 1</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Besides this capital difference there are many minor discrepancies
between the teaching of St. Augustine and that
of Baius and Quesnel. Augustine, it is true, in his struggle
with Pelagianism,<note place='foot'>Especially against Julian of
Eclanum. Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Contra Iulianum</hi>,
IV, 3.</note> strongly emphasized the opposition
existing between grace and sin, between love of God
and love of the world; but he never dreamed of asserting
that every act performed in the state of mortal sin is sinful
for the reason that it is not performed in the state of
grace. Scholasticism has long since applied the necessary
corrective to his exaggerations. It is perfectly
orthodox to say that there is an irreconcilable opposition
between the state of mortal sin and the state of
grace. <q>No one can serve two masters.</q><note place='foot'>Matth.
VI, 24.</note> This is
not, however, by any means equivalent to saying, as the
Jansenists do, that the sinner, not being in the state of
grace, of necessity sins in whatever he does. Augustine
expressly admits that, no matter how deeply God
may allow a man to fall, and no matter how strongly
concupiscence may dominate his will, he is yet able to
pray for grace, which is in itself a distinctly salutary
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
act. <q>If a sin is such,</q> he says in his <hi rend='italic'>Retractationes</hi>,
<q>that it is itself a punishment for sin, what can the
will under the domination of cupidity do, except, if it
be pious, to pray for help?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Retract.</hi>,
I, 15: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quando
peccatum tale est, ut idem sit poena
peccati, quantum est quod valet
voluntas sub dominante cupiditate,
nisi forte, si pia est, ut oret auxilium?</foreign></q></note> Compare this sentence
with the fortieth proposition of Baius: <q>The sinner in all his actions serves the
lust which rules him,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prop. Baii Damn.</hi>,
40: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In
omnibus suis actibus peccator servit
dominanti cupiditati.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1040.)</note> and
you will perceive the third essential difference that separates
the teaching of St. Augustine from that of the Jansenists.
The former, even when he speaks, not of the
two opposing habits, but of their respective acts, does not,
like Jansenism, represent the universality of sin without
theological charity as a physical and fundamental necessity,
but merely as a historical phenomenon which admits of
exceptions. Thus he writes in his treatise On the Spirit
and the Letter: <q>If they who by nature do the things
contained in the law, must not be regarded as yet in the
number of those whom Christ's grace justifies, but rather
as among those whose actions (although they are those
of ungodly men who do not truly and rightly worship the
true God) we not only cannot blame, but actually praise,
and with good reason, and rightly too, since they have
been done, so far as we read or know or hear, according
to the rule of righteousness; though were we to discuss
the question with what motive they are done, they would
hardly be found to be such as to deserve the praise and
defense which are due to righteous conduct.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Spiritu et Litera</hi>, c. 27, n.
48: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si hi qui naturaliter, quae
legis sunt, faciunt, nondum sunt
habendi in numero eorum quos
Christi iustificat gratia [Rom. II,
24], sed in eorum potius, quorum
(etiam impiorum nec Deum verum
veraciter iusteque colentium) quaedam
tamen facta vel legimus vel
novimus vel audimus, quae secundum
iustitiae regulam non solum
vituperare non possumus, verum
etiam merito recteque laudamus;
quamquam si discutiantur, quo fine
fiant, vix inveniuntur quae iustitiae
debitam laudem defensionemve mereantur.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>

<p>
In conclusion we will quote a famous passage from St.
Augustine which reads like a protest against the distortions
of Baius and Jansenius. <q>Love,</q> he says, <q>is
either divine or human; human love is either licit or illicit....
I speak first of licit human love, which is free from
censure; then, of illicit human love, which is damnable;
and in the third place, of divine love, which leads us to
Heaven.... You, therefore, have that love which is
licit; it is human, but, as I have said, licit, so much so
that, if it were lacking, [the want of] it would be censured.
You are permitted with human love to love your
spouse, your children, your friends and fellow-citizens.
But, as you see, the ungodly, too, have this love, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>
pagans, Jews, heretics. Who among them does not love
his wife, his children, his brethren, his neighbors, his
relations and friends? This, therefore, is human love.
If any one would be so unfeeling as to lose even human
love, not loving his own children, ... we should no
longer regard him as a human being.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Serm.
de Temp.</hi>, 349, c. 1, 1
sq.: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Caritas alia est divina, alia
humana; alia est humana licita, alia
illicita.... Prius ergo loquor de
humana licita, quae non reprehenditur;
deinde de humana illicita, quae
damnatur; tertio de divina, quae nos
perducit ad regnum.... Licitam
ergo caritatem habete; humana est,
sed ut dixi licita, sed ita licita ut,
si defuerit, reprehendatur. Liceat
vobis humanâ caritate diligere coniuges,
diligere filios, diligere amicos
vestros, diligere cives vestros. Sed
videtis istam caritatem esse posse et
impiorum, i.e. paganorum, Iudaeorum,
haereticorum. Quis enim
eorum non amat uxorem, filios,
fratres, vicinos, affines, amicos?
Haec ergo humana est. Si ergo tali
quisque crudelitate effertur, ut perdat
etiam humanum dilectionis affectum,
et non amat filios suos, ... nec
inter homines numerandus est.</foreign></q>
(Migne, <hi rend='italic'>P. L.</hi>, XXXIX, 1529.)</note> Tepe pertinently
observes<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Institutiones Theologicae</hi>, Vol.
III, p. 23.</note> that St. Augustine in this passage asserts
not only the possibility but the actual existence of
naturally good though unmeritorious works
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>opera steriliter
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
bona</foreign>), and that the theory of Ripalda<note place='foot'>As
explained above, pp. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref> sqq.</note> is untenable
for this reason, if for no other, that the quoted
passage is cited in Pius VI's Bull <q><hi rend='italic'>Auctorem
fidei</hi>.</q><note place='foot'>Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 1524.
On the teaching of St. Augustine,
see J. Mausbach, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ethik des hl.
Augustinus</hi>, Vol. II, pp. 260 sqq.,
Freiburg 1909.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Article 2. The Necessity Of Actual Grace For All Salutary Acts</head>

<p>
Salutary acts (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actus salutares</foreign>) are those
directed to the attainment of sanctifying grace
and the supernatural end of man.
</p>

<p>
According to this double purpose, salutary acts may be
divided into two classes: (1) those that prepare for justification
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actus simpliciter salutares</foreign>), and (2) those
which, following justification, gain merits for Heaven
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actus meritorii</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
In consequence of the supernatural character of the
acts which they comprise, both these categories are diametrically
opposed to that class of acts which are good
only in a natural way,<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_1_Article_1'>Art. 1</ref>.</note>
and hence must be carefully distinguished
from the latter. The Fathers did not, of course,
employ the technical terms of modern theology; they
had their own peculiar phrases for designating what we
call salutary acts, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>agere sicut oportet vel expedit,
agere ad salutem, agere ad iustificationem, agere ad vitam
aeternam</foreign>, etc.<note place='foot'>On these and similar formulas
see Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina
Actuali</hi>, thes. 22.</note>
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Pelagianism.</hi>&mdash;Pelagianism started as a
reaction against Manichaeism, but fell into the
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
opposite extreme of exaggerating the capacity
of human nature at the expense of grace. It
denied original sin<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 218 sqq.</note> and grace.
</p>

<p>
As the necessity of grace for all salutary acts is
a fundamental dogma of the Christian religion,
the Church proceeded with unusual severity
against Pelagian naturalism and condemned its
vagaries through the mouth of many councils.
</p>

<p>
a) Pelagius was a British lay monk, who came
to Rome about the year 400 to propagate his erroneous
views.<note place='foot'>For details of his life see
J. Pohle, art. <q>Pelagius and Pelagianism</q>
in Vol. XI of the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic
Encyclopedia</hi>.</note> He found a willing pupil in Celestius,
who after distinguishing himself as a
lawyer, had been ordained to the priesthood at
Ephesus, about 411.
</p>

<p>
The Pelagian heresy gained another powerful champion
in the person of Bishop Julian of Eclanum in Apulia.
Its strongest opponent was St. Augustine. Under his
powerful blows the Pelagians repeatedly changed their
tactics, without however giving up their cardinal error
in regard to grace. Their teaching on this point may be
summarized as follows: The human will is able by
its natural powers to keep all the commandments of God,
to resist temptation, and to gain eternal life; in fact it can attain to a state of
holiness and impeccability<note place='foot'><foreign
lang='la' rend='italic'>Impeccantia</foreign>, ἀναμαρτησία.</note> in
which the petition <q>Forgive us our trespasses</q> no longer
has any meaning except perhaps as an expression of humility.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
St. Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De Haeres.
ad Quodvultdeum</hi>, n. 88.</note>
In so far, however, as free-will is itself a gift of
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
the Creator, man can perform no good works without
grace. At a later period of his career Pelagius admitted
the existence of merely external supernatural graces,
such as revelation and the example of Christ and the
saints,&mdash;which led St. Augustine to remark: <q>This is
the hidden and despicable poison of your heresy that
you represent the grace of Christ as His example, not
His gift, alleging that man is justified by imitating Him,
not by the ministration of the Holy Spirit.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign
lang='la' rend='italic'>Hoc est occultum et horrendum
virus haeresis vestrae, ut velitis
gratiam Christi in exemplo eius esse,
non in dono eius, dicentes quia per
eius imitationem fiunt iusti, non per
subministrationem Spiritus Sancti.</foreign></q>
(S. Aug., <hi rend='italic'>Opus Imperf. contr. Iulian.</hi>,
II, 146.)</note> But even
this external grace, according to Pelagius, does not confer
the strength necessary to perform good works; it
merely makes it easier to keep the commandments.
Pelagius did not deny that justification and adoptive sonship,
considered in their ideal relation to the <q>kingdom
of Heaven,</q> as distinguished from <q>eternal life,</q><note place='foot'>On
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>regnum coelorum</foreign> in
contradistinction to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vita aeterna</foreign>, in
the teaching of Pelagius, see St.
Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De Pecc. Mer. et Rem.</hi>,
I, 18 sqq.</note> are
not identical in adults with the grace of creation, but he
denied their gratuity by asserting that the free will is
able to merit all these graces by its own power.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V.
infra</hi>, <ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_2'>Sect. 2</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Whatever may have been the variations of Pelagianism,
it is patent from the writings of St. Augustine that
its defenders one and all rejected the necessity and existence
of the immediate grace of the will.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
p. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>.</note> Their attitude
towards the illuminating grace of the intellect is in dispute.
Some theologians<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>
Petavius, <hi rend='italic'>De Pelag. et
Semipelag.</hi>, c. 8 sq.; Wirceburg.,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, n. 182; Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Div. Actuali</hi>, pp. 140 sqq.</note> think the Pelagians admitted,
others<note place='foot'>Among them Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>Prolegom.
de Gratia</hi>, c. 3, and J. Scheeben,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatik</hi>, Vol. III, pp. 739 sq.</note>
that they denied its existence. No matter what
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
they may have held on this point, there can be no doubt
that the followers of Pelagius conceived the object of
grace to be nothing more than to facilitate the work of
salvation.
</p>

<p>
b) Within the short span of twenty years (A. D.
411 to 431) no less than twenty-four councils
occupied themselves with this new heresy.
</p>

<p>
At first the wily heretic succeeded in deceiving the
prelates assembled at Lydda (Diospolis), A. D. 415; but
the bishops of Northern Africa, among them St. Augustine,
roundly condemned his teaching at two councils held
with the sanction of Pope Innocent I at Carthage and Mileve
in 416. Shortly afterwards, deceived by the terms of
the creeds and explanations which they circulated, Pope
Zosimus (417-418) declared both Pelagius and Celestius
to be innocent. Despite this intervention, however, two
hundred African bishops, at a plenary council held at
Carthage, A. D. 418, reiterated the canons of Mileve
and submitted them for approval to the Holy See. These
proceedings induced Zosimus to adopt stronger measures.
In his <hi rend='italic'>Epistula Tractoria</hi> (418) he formally condemned
Pelagianism and persuaded the Emperor to send Julian of
Eclanum and seventeen other recalcitrant bishops into
exile. The canons of Carthage and Mileve were subsequently
received by the universal Church as binding definitions
of the faith. The most important of them in regard
to grace is this: <q>If anyone shall say that the
grace of justification is given to us for the purpose of
enabling us to do more easily by the aid of grace what
we are commanded to do by free-will, as if we were able,
also, though less easily, to observe the commandments of
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
God without the help of grace, let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign
lang='la' rend='italic'>Quicunque dixerit, ideo nobis
gratiam iustificationis dari, ut quod
facere per liberum iubemur arbitrium
facilius possimus implere per
gratiam, tamquam etsi gratia non
daretur, non quidem facile, sed
tamen possimus etiam sine illa implere
divina mandata, anathema sit.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 105.)</note>
The Ecumenical Council of Ephesus (A. D. 431), with
the approval of Pope Celestine I, renewed the condemnation
of Celestius, but it was not until nearly a century later
that Pelagianism received its death-blow. In 529 the Second
Council of Orange defined: <q>If any one assert that
he is able, by the power of nature, and without the illumination
and inspiration of the Holy Ghost, who grants
to all men the disposition believingly to accept the truth,
rightly (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ut expedit</foreign>)
to think or choose anything good
pertaining to eternal salvation, or to assent to salutary,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> evangelical preaching, such a one is deceived by a
heretical spirit.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si
quis per naturae vigorem
bonum aliquod, quod ad salutem
pertinet vitae aeternae, cogitare ut
expedit aut eligere sive salutari, i.e.
evangelicae praedicationi consentire
posse confirmat absque illuminatione
et inspiratione Spiritus Sancti, qui
dat omnibus suavitatem in consentiendo
et credendo veritati, haeretico
fallitur spiritu.</foreign></q> (Can. 7, quoted
by Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 180.)</note> This decision was reiterated by the
Council of Trent: <q>If any one saith that the grace of
God through Jesus Christ is given only for this, that man
may be able more easily to live justly and to merit eternal
life, as if by free-will without grace he were able to do
both, though hardly indeed and with difficulty, let him be
anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 2:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, ad hoc solum divinam gratiam
per Iesum Christum dari, ut
facilius homo iuste vivere ac vitam
aeternam promereri possit, quasi per
liberum arbitrium sine gratia utrumque,
sed aegre tamen et difficulter
possit, anathema sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 812.)</note>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Pelagianism Refuted.</hi>&mdash;Sacred Scripture
and the Fathers plainly teach that man is unable
to perform any salutary act by his own power.
</p>

<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>

<p>
a) Among the many Biblical texts that can
be quoted in support of this statement, our
Lord's beautiful parable of the vine and its
branches is especially striking. Cfr. John XV,
4 sq.: <q>As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself,
unless it abide in the vine, so neither can you, unless
you abide in me. I am the vine; you the
branches: he that abideth in me, and I in him, the
same beareth much fruit: for without me you can
do nothing.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sicut palmes non
potest ferre fructum a semetipso, nisi manserit
in vite: sic nec vos, nisi in me manseritis.
Ego sum vitis, vos palmites:
qui manet in me, et ego in eo, hic
fert fructum multum: quia sine me
nihil potestis facere</foreign> (ὅτι χωρὶσ
ἐμοῦ οὐ δύνασθε ποιεῖν οὐδέν).</q></note>
</p>

<p>
α) The context shows that Jesus is not speaking here
of purely natural works of the kind for which the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>concursus generalis</foreign> of God suffices, but that
He has in mind salutary acts in the strictly supernatural sense;
and the truth He wishes to inculcate is that fallen nature
cannot perform such acts except through Him and with
His assistance. This supernatural influence is not, however,
to be understood exclusively of sanctifying or
habitual grace, because our Divine Saviour refers to the
fruits of justification and to salutary works. <q>Of these
he does not say: <q>Without me you can do but little,</q> but:
<q>Without me you can do nothing.</q> Be it therefore little
or much, it cannot be done without Him, without whom
nothing can be done.</q><note place='foot'>St. Augustine,
<hi rend='italic'>Tract. in Ioa.</hi>,
81, n. 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non ait, quia sine me
parum potestis facere, sed nihil
potestis facere. Sive ergo parum
sive multum, sine illo fieri non potest,
sine quo nihil fieri potest.</foreign></q></note> If this was true of the Apostles,
who were in the state of sanctifying grace,<note place='foot'>Cfr. John XV, 3.</note>
it must be
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
true <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a fortiori</foreign> of sinners. Consequently,
supernatural grace is absolutely necessary for the performance of any
and all acts profitable for salvation.
</p>

<p>
β) Nowhere is this fundamental truth so
clearly and insistently brought out as in the
epistles of St. Paul, who is preëminently <q>the
Doctor of Grace</q> among the Apostles.
</p>

<p>
There are, according to him, three categories of supernatural
acts: salutary thoughts, holy resolves, and good
works.
</p>

<p>
St. Paul teaches that all right thinking is from God.
2 Cor. III, 5: <q>Not that we are sufficient to think anything
of ourselves, as of ourselves; but our sufficiency is
from God.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non quod
sufficientes simus, cogitate aliquid a nobis quasi ex
nobis, sed sufficientia nostra ex Deo
est.</foreign></q> On this text cfr. Cornely,
<hi rend='italic'>Comment. in h. l.</hi>, Paris 1892.</note>
</p>

<p>
He also declares that all good resolves come from above.
Rom. IX, 15 sq.: <q>For he saith to Moses: I will have
mercy on whom I will have mercy; and I will shew
mercy to whom I will shew mercy. So then it is not of
him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that
sheweth mercy.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Moysi enim
dicit: Miserebor cuius misereor et misericordiam praestabo
cuius miserebor. Igitur non
volentis neque currentis</foreign> (οὐ τοῦ
θέλοντος οὐδὲ τοῦ τρέχοντος), <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sed
miserentis est Dei.</foreign></q> (Rom. IX, 15
sq.)</note>
</p>

<p>
He furthermore asserts that all good works come from
God. Phil. II, 13: <q>For it is God who worketh in you,
both to will and to accomplish, according to his good
will.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus
est enim, qui operatur
in vobis et velle et perficere</foreign> (καὶ
τὸ θέλειν καὶ τὸ ἐνεργεῖν) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pro
bona voluntate.</foreign></q> (Phil. II, 13.)</note> 1 Cor. XII, 3: <q>No man can say:
Lord Jesus, but by the Holy Ghost.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Nemo potest dicere: Dominus
Iesus, nisi in Spiritu Sancto.</foreign></q> (1
Cor. XII, 3.)</note> Pronouncing the
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
holy name of Jesus is obviously regarded as a salutary
act, because mere physical utterance does not require
the assistance of the Holy Ghost.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Matth.
VII, 21; VIII, 29.</note> But the act as a salutary
act is physically impossible without divine assistance,
because it is essentially supernatural and consequently
exceeds the powers of nature.<note place='foot'>Others explain the passage 1
Cor. XII, 3 differently. Cfr. also
Rom. VIII, 26; Phil. I, 6; Eph. II,
5 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) The argument from Tradition is based
almost entirely on the authority of St. Augustine,
in whom, as Liebermann observes, God wrought a
miracle of grace that he might become its powerful
defender. There is no need of quoting specific
texts because this whole treatise is interlarded
with Augustinian dicta concerning the necessity
of grace.
</p>

<p>
α) An important point is to prove that the early Fathers
held the Augustinian, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Catholic view. It stands
to reason that if these Fathers had taught a different
doctrine, the Church would not have so vehemently rejected
Pelagianism as an heretical innovation. Augustine
himself insists on the novelty of the Pelagian teaching.
<q>Such is the Pelagian heresy,</q> he says, <q>which is not an ancient one, but has
only lately come into existence.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia et Libero Arbitrio</hi>,
c. 4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Talis est haeresis pelagiana,
non antiqua, sed ante non multum
tempus exorta.</foreign></q></note>
And this view is confirmed by Pope Celestine I, who declares
in his letter to the Bishops of Gaul (A. D. 431):
<q>This being the state of the question, novelty should cease
to attack antiquity.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Desinat,
si res ita sunt, incessere
novitas vetustatem.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
In fact the teaching of the Apostolic Fathers, although
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
less explicit, agrees entirely with that of Augustine.
Thus St. Irenaeus says: <q>As the dry earth, if it receives
no moisture, does not bring forth fruit, so we,
being dry wood, could never bear fruit for life without
supernatural rain freely given.... The blessing of salvation
comes to us from God, not from ourselves.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adv.
Haer.</hi>, III, 17, 2: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sicut
arida terra, si non percipiat humorem,
non fructificat, sic et nos
lignum aridum existentes nunquam
fructificaremus vitam sine superna
voluntaria pluvia.... Non a nobis,
sed a Deo est bonum salutis nostrae.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
The necessity of grace is indirectly inculcated by the
Church when she petitions God to grant salutary graces
to all men&mdash;a most ancient and venerable practice, which
Pope St. Celestine explains as follows: <q>The law of
prayer should determine the law of belief. For when the
priests of holy nations administer the office entrusted to
them, asking God for mercy, they plead the cause of the
human race, and together with the whole Church ask and
pray that the unbelievers may receive the faith, that the
idolaters may be freed from the errors of their impiety,
that the veil be lifted from the heart of the Jews, and
they be enabled to perceive the light of truth, that the
heretics may return to their senses by a true perception
of the Catholic faith, that the schismatics may receive
the spirit of reborn charity, that the sinners be granted
the remedy of penance, and that the door of heavenly
mercy be opened to the catechumens who are led to the
sacraments of regeneration.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Legem credendi lex statuat
supplicandi. Quum enim sanctarum
plebium praesules madatâ sibi legatione
fungantur apud divinam clementiam,
humani generis agunt
causam et tota secum Ecclesia congemiscente
postulant et precantur,
ut infidelibus donetur fides, ut idololatrae
ab impietatis suae liberentur
erroribus, ut Iudaeis ablato cordis
velamine lux veritatis appareat, ut
haeretici catholicae fidei perceptione
resipiscant, ut schismatici spiritum
redivivae caritatis accipiant, ut lapsis
poenitentiae remedia conferantur, ut
denique catechumenis ad regenerationis
sacramenta perductis coelestis
misericordiae aula reseretur.</foreign></q>
(Migne, <hi rend='italic'>P. L.</hi>, XLV, 1759.)</note> In matters of salvation
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
prayer and grace are correlative terms; the practice of the
one implies the necessity and gratuity of the other.<note place='foot'>For
additional Patristic texts see Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina
Actuali</hi>, thes. 26.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) That the Fathers not only conceived grace
to be necessary for the cure of weakness induced
by sin (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia sanans</foreign>) in a merely moral sense,
but thought it to be metaphysically necessary for
the communication of physical strength (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
elevans</foreign>), is evidenced by such oft-recurring similes
as these: Grace is as necessary for salvation
as the eye is to see, or as wings are to fly, or as
rain is for the growth of plants.
</p>

<p>
It will suffice to quote a passage from the writings of
St. Chrysostom. <q>The eyes,</q> he says, <q>are beautiful and
useful for seeing, but if they would attempt to see without
light, all their beauty and visual power would avail them
nothing. Thus, too, the soul is but an obstacle in its own way if
it endeavors to see without the Holy Ghost.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom.
in 1 Cor., 7.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
This view is strengthened by the further teaching of
the Fathers that supernatural grace was as indispensable
to the angels in their state of probation (in which they
were free from concupiscence) and to our first parents
in Paradise (gifted as they were with the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>donum integritatis</foreign>),
as it is to fallen man; the only difference being
that in the case of the latter, grace has the additional object
of curing the infirmities and overcoming the difficulties
arising from concupiscence. In regard to the
angels St. Augustine says; <q>And who made this will but
He who created them with a good will, that is to say with
a chaste love by which they should cleave to Him, in one
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
and the same act creating their nature and endowing it
with grace?... We must therefore acknowledge, with
the praise due to the Creator, that not only of holy men,
but also of the holy angels, it can be said that <q>the love of
God is shed abroad in their hearts by the Holy Ghost,
who is given unto them.</q></q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Civitate Dei</hi>, XII, 9:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Istam [bonam voluntatem] quis
fecerat nisi ille, qui eos cum bona
voluntate, i.e. cum amore casto quo
illi adhaererent creavit, simul eis et
condens naturam et largiens gratiam?...
Confitendum est igitur
cum debita laude Creatoris, non ad
solos sanctos homines pertinere,
verum etiam de sanctis angelis
posse dici, quod caritas Dei diffusa
sit in eis per Spiritum Sanctum, qui
datus est eis.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
Equally convincing is the argument that Adam in Paradise
was unable to perform any salutary acts without
divine grace. <q>Just as it is in man's power to die whenever
he will,</q> says St. Augustine, <q>... but the mere will
cannot preserve life in the absence of food and the other
means of life; so man in Paradise was able of his mere
will, simply by abandoning righteousness, to destroy himself;
but to have led a life of righteousness would have
been too much for his will, unless it had been sustained by the power
of Him who made him.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>,
c. 106: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sicut
mori est in hominis potestate, quum
velit, ... ad vitam vero tenendam
voluntas non satis est, si adiutoria
sive alimentorum sive quorumcunque
tutaminum desint, sic homo in paradiso
ad se occidendum relinquendo
iustitiam idoneus erat per voluntatem;
ut autem ab eo teneretur vita
iustitiae, parum erat velle nisi ille,
qui eum fecerat, adiuvaret.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
This is also the teaching of the Second Council of Orange
(A. D. 529): <q>Even if human nature remained in
the state of integrity, in which it was constituted, it would
in no wise save itself without the help of its Creator.
If it was unable, without the grace of God, to keep what
it had received, how should it be able without the grace
of God to regain what it has lost?</q><note place='foot'>Can. 19:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Natura humana,
etiamsi in illa integritate in qua est
condita permaneret, nullo modo seipsam,
Creatore suo non adiuvante,
servaret. Unde quum sine gratia
Dei salutem non possit custodire
quae accepit, quomodo sine Dei
gratia poterit reparare quod perdidit?</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
192.)&mdash;St. Augustine holds that our
first parents would have been able
to preserve the state of grace by
the divine <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>adiutorium sine quo non</foreign>,
and that consequently the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>adiutorium
quo</foreign> would have been superfluous
to them. On this subtle question
cfr. Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelectiones Dogmaticae</hi>,
Vol. V, pp. 55 sqq., and Schiffini,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 472 sqq.</note>
</p>

<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>

<p>
c) The theological argument for the metaphysical
necessity of grace is based on the essentially
supernatural character of all salutary acts.
</p>

<p>
α) St. Thomas formulates it as follows: <q>Eternal
life is an end transcending the proportion of human
nature, ... and therefore man, by nature, can perform
no meritorious works proportioned to eternal life, but
requires for this purpose a higher power,&mdash;the power
of grace. Consequently, man cannot merit eternal life
without grace. He is, however, able to perform acts
productive of some good connatural to man, such as tilling the soil, drinking, eating,
acts of friendship, etc.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>,
1a 2ae, qu. 109,
art. 5: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vita aeterna est finis excedens
proportionem naturae humanae ...
et ideo homo per sua
naturalia non potest producere opera
meritoria proportionata vitae
aeternae; sed ad hoc exigitur altior
virtus, quae est virtus gratiae. Et
ideo sine gratia homo non potest
mereri vitam aeternam. Potest
tamen facere opera perducentia ad
bonum aliquod homini connaturale,
sicut laborare in agro, bibere, manducare
et habere amicum et alia
huiusmodi.</foreign></q></note>
For the reason here indicated it is as impossible for man
to perform salutary acts without grace as it would be to
work miracles without that divine assistance which transcends
the powers of nature.<note place='foot'>For the necessary Augustinian
citations in proof of this assertion
see Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>,
pp. 174 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) Catholic theologians are unanimous in admitting
that all salutary acts are and must needs be supernatural;
but they differ in their conception of this supernatural
quality (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>supernaturalitas</foreign>).
The problem underlying this
difference of opinion may be stated thus: A thing may
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
be supernatural either entitatively,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quoad substantiam</foreign>, or
merely as to the manner of its existence,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quoad modum</foreign>.
The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>supernaturale quoad
substantiam</foreign> is divided into the
strictly supernatural and the merely preternatural.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 186 sqq.</note> The
question is: To what category of the supernatural belong
the salutary acts which man performs by the aid of
grace? Undoubtedly there are actual graces which are
entitatively natural, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>
the purely mediate grace of illumination,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V.
supra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.</note>
the natural graces conferred in the pure state of nature, the
actual graces of the sensitive sphere,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> sq.</note> and
the so-called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cogitatio congrua</foreign>
of Vasquez.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>, pp.
<ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> sqq.</note> The
problem therefore narrows itself down to the <emph>immediate</emph>
graces of intellect and will. Before the Tridentine
Council theologians contented themselves with
acknowledging the divinely revealed fact that these graces
are supernatural; it was only after the Council that they
began to speculate on the precise character of this
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>supernaturalitas</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Some, following the teaching of the Scotist school,
ascribed the supernatural character of salutary acts to
their free acceptation on the part of God, holding them to
be purely natural in their essence and raised to the supernatural
sphere merely <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per
denominationem extrinsecam</foreign>.<note place='foot'>On the teaching of Scotus himself
with regard to this point cfr.
P. Minges, O.F.M., <hi rend='italic'>Die Gnadenlehre
des Duns Scotus auf ihren
angeblichen Pelagianismus und Semipelagianismus
geprüft</hi>, Münster 1906.</note>
This view is untenable. For if nature, as such,
possessed the intrinsic power to perform salutary acts,
irrespective of their acceptation by God, the Fathers
and councils would err in teaching that this power is
derived from the immediate graces of illumination and
strengthening.<note place='foot'>This is true of man even in the
exalted state in which he existed in
Paradise. It is true also of the
angels. It is true even of the human
nature of our Lord Jesus Christ
Himself. Cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>Christology</hi>,
pp. 221 sqq.</note>
</p>

<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>

<p>
Others hold that the salutary acts which grace enables
man to perform, are supernatural only
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quoad modum</foreign>;
because while it is the Holy Ghost Himself who incites
the natural faculties to salutary thoughts and good resolves,
He does not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>eo ipso</foreign>
raise these thoughts and resolves
to the supernatural plane. This theory, besides being
open to the same objection which we have urged
against the first, involves another difficulty. If all salutary
acts were supernatural only
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quoad modum</foreign>, sanctifying
grace, which is as certainly supernatural in its essence
as the beatific vision of God,<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 190 sqq.</note> would cease to have an
adequate purpose; for the intrinsic reason for its existence
is precisely that it raises the nature of the justified
into a permanent supernatural state of being.
</p>

<p>
A third school of theologians tries to solve the difficulty
by adding to the natural operation of the intellect and the
will some accidental supernatural
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>modus</foreign>. There are several
such <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>modi</foreign>, which, though inhering in nature and
really distinct therefrom, depend solely on the Holy
Ghost, and consequently transcend the natural powers of
man, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the duration or intensity of a salutary act.
This theory at first blush appears more plausible than the
other two, but it cannot be squared with the teaching of
Tradition. In the first place, the duration or intensity
of a salutary act cannot affect its essence or nature.
Then again, every such accidental supernatural
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>modus</foreign> is
produced either by grace alone, or by grace working conjointly
with free-will. In the former hypothesis it would
be useless, because it would not render the free salutary
act, as such, supernatural; in the latter case it could do no
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
more than aid the will to do what is morally impossible,
whereas every salutary act is in matter of fact a physical
impossibility, that is, impossible to unaided nature.<note place='foot'>Palmieri,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>,
p. 184.</note>
</p>

<p>
There remains a fourth explanation, which ascribes to
every salutary act an ontological, substantial, intrinsic
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>supernaturalitas</foreign>,
whereby it is elevated to a higher and
essentially different plane of being and operation. This
theory is convincingly set forth by Suarez in his treatise
on the Necessity of Grace.<note place='foot'>Suarez,
<hi rend='italic'>De Necessitate Gratiae</hi>,
II, 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
It may be asked: If the salutary acts which we
perform are supernatural in substance, why are we not
conscious of the fact? The answer is not far to seek.
Philosophical analysis shows that the intrinsic nature of
our psychic operations is no more a subject of immediate
consciousness than the substance of the soul itself.
Consequently, sanctifying grace cannot reveal its presence
through our inner consciousness. Having no intuitive
knowledge of our own Ego, we are compelled
to specify the different acts of the soul by means of their
respective objects and their various tendencies (cognition,
volition). To our consciousness the supernatural
love of God does not present itself as essentially different
from the natural.<note place='foot'>On the whole subject of this
Article cfr. S. Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Divina</hi>, pp. 227 sqq.; Rademacher,
<hi rend='italic'>Natur und Gnade</hi>, M. Gladbach 1908.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Article 3. The Necessity Of Actual Grace For The States Of
Unbelief, Mortal Sin, And Justification</head>

<p>
Every adult man, viewed in his relation to actual
grace, is in one of three distinct states:
</p>

<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>

<p>
(1) The state of unbelief
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>status infidelitatis</foreign>), which
may be either negative, as in the case of heathens, or
positive, as in the case of apostates and formal heretics;
</p>

<p>
(2) The state of mortal sin
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>status peccati mortalis</foreign>),
when the sinner has already received, or not yet lost,
the grace of faith, which is the beginning of justification;
</p>

<p>
(3) The state of justification itself (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>status iustitiae
sive gratiae sanctificantis</foreign>), in which much remains yet
to be done to attain eternal happiness.
</p>

<p>
The question we have now to consider is: Does man
need actual grace in every one of these three states, and
if so, to what extent?
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Semipelagianism.</hi>&mdash;Semipelagianism is an
attempt to effect a compromise between Pelagianism
and Augustinism by attributing to mere nature
a somewhat greater importance in matters of
salvation than St. Augustine was willing to admit.
</p>

<p>
a) After Augustine had for more than twenty years
vigorously combatted and finally defeated Pelagianism,
some pious monks of Marseilles, under the leadership
of John Cassian, Abbot of St. Victor,<note place='foot'>Died 432. On his life and works
see Bardenhewer-Shahan, <hi rend='italic'>Patrology</hi>,
pp. 515 sqq.</note> tried to find
middle ground between his teaching and that of the
Pelagians. Cassian's treatise <hi rend='italic'>Collationes
Patrum</hi>,<note place='foot'>Reproduced in Migne, <hi rend='italic'>P. L.</hi>,
XLIX, 477-1328.</note> and
the reports sent to St. Augustine by his disciples Prosper
and Hilary, enable us to form a pretty fair idea of
the Semipelagian system. Its principal tenets were the
following:
</p>

<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>

<p>
α) There is a distinction between the <q>beginning of
faith</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>initium fidei</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>affectus credulitatis</foreign>) and <q>increase
in faith</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>augmentum fidei</foreign>).
The former depends entirely
on the will, while the latter, like faith itself, requires
the grace of Christ.
</p>

<p>
β) Nature can merit grace by its own efforts, though
this natural merit (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum naturae</foreign>)
is founded on equity only
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum de congruo</foreign>), and does not confer
a right in strict justice, as Pelagius contended.
</p>

<p>
γ) Free-will, after justification, can of its own power
secure the gift of final perseverance
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>donum perseverantiae</foreign>);
which consequently is not a special grace, but
a purely natural achievement.
</p>

<p>
δ) The bestowal or denial of baptismal grace in the case
of infants, who can have no previous
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>merita de congruo</foreign>,
depends on their hypothetical future merits or demerits as
foreseen by God from all eternity.<note place='foot'>This contention is false, but it
has never been proscribed as heretical.
Prosper says in his <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> 226, 5:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Tales aiunt perdi talesque [infantes]
salvari, quales futures illos
in annis maioribus, si ad activam
servarentur vitam, scientia divina
praeviderit.</foreign></q> On this absurd assertion
see Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God: His
Knowability, Essence, and Attributes</hi>,
pp. 380 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) Informed of these errors by his disciples, St.
Augustine energetically set to work, and in spite
of his advanced age wrote two books against the
Semipelagians, entitled respectively, <hi rend='italic'>De Praedestinatione
Sanctorum</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>De Dono Perseverantiae</hi>.
The new teaching was not yet, however,
regarded as formally heretical, and Augustine
treated his opponents with great consideration,
in fact he humbly acknowledged that he himself
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
had professed similar errors before his consecration
(A. D. 394).<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Praedest. Sanctorum</hi>, c. 3,
n. 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... putans fidem, quâ in
Deum credimus, non esse donum
Dei, sed a nobis esse in nobis et
per illam nos impetrare Dei dona,
quibus temperanter et iuste et pie
vivamus in hoc saeculo.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
After Augustine's death, Prosper and Hilary
went to Rome and interested Pope Celestine in
their cause. In a dogmatic letter addressed to
the Bishops of Gaul, the Pontiff formally approved
the teaching of St. Augustine on grace and
original sin, but left open such other <q>more profound
and difficult incidental questions</q> as predestination
and the manner in which grace operates
in the soul.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Denzinger-Bannwart,
<hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>,
n. 128 sqq.</note> But as this papal letter (called
<q><hi rend='italic'>Indiculus</hi></q>) was an instruction rather than an
ex-cathedra definition, the controversy continued
until, nearly a century later (A. D. 529), the
Second Council of Orange, convoked by St.
Caesarius of Arles, formally condemned the Semipelagian
heresy. This council, or at least its first
eight canons,<note place='foot'>Ernst (<hi rend='italic'>Werke und Tugenden
der Ungläubigen nach Augustinus</hi>,
Freiburg 1871) contends that the
approbation of Boniface II comprised
all the canons of this synod.</note> received the solemn approbation of
Pope Boniface II (A. D. 530) and thus became
vested with ecumenical authority.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
F. Wörter, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Dogmengeschichte
des Semipelagianismus</hi>,
Münster 1900.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Teaching of the Church.</hi>&mdash;The
Catholic Church teaches the absolute necessity of
actual grace for all stages on the way to salvation.
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
We shall demonstrate this in five separate
theses.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis I: Prevenient grace is absolutely necessary,
not only for faith, but for the very beginning of faith.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de fide</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. The Second Council of Orange defined
against the Semipelagians: <q>If any one say that
increase in faith, as well as the beginning of faith,
and the very impulse by which we are led to believe
in Him who justifies the sinner, and by which
we obtain the regeneration of holy Baptism, is in
us not as a gift of grace, that is to say, through
the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, but by nature, ...
is an adversary of the dogmatic teaching of
the Apostles....</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Arausic.</hi>
II, can. 5 (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 178): <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
sicut augmentum, ita etiam initium
fidei ipsumque credulitatis affectum,
quo in eum credimus qui iustificat
impium et ad regenerationem sacri
baptismatis pervenimus, non per
gratiae donum, i.e. per inspirationem
Spiritus S., ... sed naturaliter nobis
inesse dicit, apostolicis dogmatibus
adversarius approbatur.</foreign></q> Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Vatican.</hi>, Sess. III, cap. 3. (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1791).</note>
</p>

<p>
a) This is thoroughly Scriptural doctrine, as
St. Augustine<note place='foot'>In his treatise <hi rend='italic'>De Praedestinatione
Sanctorum</hi>.</note> and Prosper<note place='foot'>In his work
<hi rend='italic'>Adversus Collatorem</hi>.</note> proved. St.
Paul's first epistle to the Corinthians had opened
the eyes of Augustine, as he himself admits. 1
Cor. IV, 7: <q>For who distinguisheth<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Discernit</foreign>, διακρίνει.</note> thee?
Or what hast thou that thou hast not received?
And if thou hast received, why dost thou glory,
as if thou hadst not received it?</q> The Apostle
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
means to say: In matters pertaining to salvation
no man has any advantage over his fellow men,
because all receive of the grace of God without
any merits of their own. This statement would
be false if any man were able to perform even the
smallest salutary act without the aid of grace.
</p>

<p>
With a special view to faith the same Apostle teaches:
<q>For by grace you are saved through faith,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Per fidem</foreign>, διὰ πίστεως.</note> and that
not of yourselves,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non ex
vobis</foreign>, οὐκ ἐξ ὑμῶν.</note> for it is the gift of
God;<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dei donum</foreign>, θεοῦ τὸ
δῶρον.</note> not of
works,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non ex operibus</foreign>,
οὐκ ἐξ ἔργων.</note> that no man may glory.</q><note place='foot'>Eph. II, 8 sq.</note>
This, too, would be false if faith could be traced to a purely natural instinct
or to some <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum de congruo</foreign> in the
Semipelagian sense.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Rom. III, 20 sqq., IX,
15 sqq.</note> Our Lord Himself, in his famous
discourse on the Holy Eucharist, unmistakably describes
faith and man's preparation for it as an effect of prevenient
grace. <q>No man can come to me, except the
Father, who hath sent me, draw him.</q><note place='foot'>John VI, 44:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nemo potest
venire ad me, nisi Pater, qui misit me, traxerit</foreign> (ἐλκύσῃ)
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>eum.</foreign></q></note> The metaphorical
expression <q>come to me,</q> according to the context,
means <q>believe in me;</q> whereas the Father's
<q>drawing</q> plainly refers to the operation of prevenient
grace. Cfr. John VI, 65 sq.: <q>But there are some of
you that believe not.... Therefore did I say to you,
that no man can come to me, unless it be given him
by the Father.</q> John VI, 29: <q>This is the work of
God,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Opus Dei</foreign>,
τὸ ἔργον τοῦ Θεοῦ.</note> that you believe in him whom he hath sent.</q> According
to our Saviour's own averment, therefore,
preaching is of no avail unless grace gives the first impulse
leading to faith.
</p>

<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>

<p>
b) As regards the argument from Tradition, it
will suffice to show that the Fathers who wrote
before Augustine, ascribed the beginning of faith
to prevenient grace.
</p>

<p>
α) In the light of the Augustinian dictum that <q>prayer
is the surest proof of grace,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>,
177: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Oratio est clarissima
gratiae testificatio.</foreign></q></note> it is safe to assume that
St. Justin Martyr voiced our dogma when he put into the
mouth of a venerable old man the words: <q>But thou
pray above all that the gates of light may be opened
unto thee; for no man is able to understand the words
of the prophets [as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praeambula fidei</foreign>]
unless God and His
Christ have revealed their meaning.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Dial.
c. Tryph.</hi></note> Augustine himself
appeals to SS. Cyprian, Ambrose, and Gregory of
Nazianzus, and then continues: <q>Such doctors, and so
great as these, saying that there is nothing of which we
may boast as of our own, which God has not given
us; and that our very heart and our thoughts are not
in our own power, ... attribute these things to the
grace of God, acknowledge them as God's gifts, testify that they come to us
from Him and are not from ourselves.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Dono Persev.</hi>, c. 19, n. 50:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Isti tales tantique doctores dicentes
non esse aliquid, de quo tamquam de
nostro quod nobis Deus non dederit
gloriemur nec ipsum cor nostrum et
cogitationes nostras in potestate nostra
esse, ... haec utique gratiae
Dei tribuunt, Dei munera agnoscunt,
ab ipso nobis, non a nobis esse testantur.</foreign></q>&mdash;For
additional Patristic
texts see Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Div.
Act.</hi>, pp. 290 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) Like the Pelagians in their teaching on original
sin,<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 239 sqq.</note> the Semipelagians in their teaching on grace relied
mainly on the authority of St. John Chrysostom,
from whose writings they loved to quote such perplexing
passages as this: <q>We must first select the good,
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
and then God adds what is of His; He does not forestall
our will because He does not wish to destroy our liberty.
But once we have made our choice, He gives us
much help. For while it rests with us to choose and to
will antecedently, it lies with him to perfect and bring to
an issue.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom. in Heb.</hi>, 12, n. 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
To understand St. Chrysostom's attitude, and that
of the Oriental Fathers generally, we must remember
that the Eastern Church considered it one of its chief
duties to safeguard the dogma of free-will against the
Manichaeans, who regarded man as an abject slave
of Fate. In such an environment it was of supreme
importance to champion the freedom of the will<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V.
infra</hi>, <ref target='Part_I_Chapter_III_Section_1'>Ch. III, Sect. 1</ref>.</note> and
to insist on the maxim: <q>Help yourself and God will
help you.</q> If the necessity of prevenient grace was
not sufficiently emphasized, the circumstances of the time
explain, and to some extent excuse, the mistake. St. Augustine
himself remarks in his treatise on the Predestination
of the Saints: <q>What need is there for us to look
into the writings of those who, before this heresy sprang
up, had no necessity of dwelling on a question so difficult
of solution as this, which beyond a doubt they would do
if they were compelled to answer such [errors as these]?
Whence it came about that they touched upon what they
thought of God's grace briefly and cursorily in some passages
of their writings.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Praedest.
Sanct.</hi>, c. 14:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quid opus est ut eorum scrutemur
opuscula, qui priusquam ista haeresis
oriretur, non habuerunt necessitatem
in hac difficili ad solvendum quaestione
versari? Quod procul dubio
facerent, si respondere talibus cogerentur.
Unde factum est, ut de
gratia Dei quid sentirent breviter
quibusdam scriptorum suorum locis et transeunter
attingerent.</foreign></q></note> Palmieri remarks<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Div. Act.</hi>, p. 288.</note> that it
would be easy to cite a number of similar passages from
the writings of the early Latin Fathers before Pelagius,
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
who certainly cannot be suspected of Semipelagian leanings.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Ripalda, <hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernaturali</hi>,
l. I, disp. 17, sect. 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
The orthodoxy of St. Chrysostom can be positively
established by a twofold argument. (1) Pope Celestine
the First recommended him as a reliable defender of the Catholic faith against
Nestorianism and Pelagianism.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>, 24
(to Maximilian, Patriarch
of Constantinople): <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sequere
priorum, a quibus eruditus es
et nutritus, exempla pontificum,
beatissimi Ioannis scientiam, sancti
Attici in repugnandis haeresibus vigilantiam.</foreign></q></note>
(2) Chrysostom rejected Semipelagianism as it
were in advance when he taught: <q>Not even faith is
of ourselves; for if He [God] had not come, if He had not called,
how should we have been able to believe?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom.
in 1 Cor.</hi>, XII, n. 2.</note>
and again when he says in his explanation of the Pauline
phrase ἀρχηγὸς τῆς πίστεως:<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom.
in Ep. ad Hebr.</hi>, XII, 2.</note> <q>He Himself hath
implanted the faith in us, He Himself hath given the
beginning.</q><note place='foot'>Αὐτὸς ἐν ἡμῖν πίστιν ἐνέθησεν,
αὐτὸς τὴν ἀρχὴν ἔδωκεν.</note> These utterances are diametrically opposed
to the heretical teaching of the Semipelagians.<note place='foot'>They
are fully explained by Palmieri,
<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>, pp. 295 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) The theological argument for our thesis is
effectively formulated by Oswald<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die
Lehre von der Heiligung</hi>,
p. 161, Paderborn 1885.</note> as follows:
<q>It is faith which first leads man from the sphere
of nature into a higher domain,&mdash;faith is the beginning
of salutary action. That this beginning
must come wholly from God, and that it cannot
come from man, goes without saying. By beginning
we mean the very first beginning.
Whether we call this first beginning itself faith,
or speak, as the Semipelagians did, of certain preambles
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
of faith,&mdash;aspirations, impulses, desires
leading to faith (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praeambula fidei: conatus, desideria,
credulitatis affectus</foreign>), makes no difference.
Wherever the supernatural domain of salutary
action begins&mdash;and it is divided off from the
natural by a very sharp line&mdash;there it is God who
begins and not man, there it is grace which
precedes,&mdash;<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
praeveniens</foreign>, as it has come to be
known by a famous term.</q>
</p>

<p>
Indeed, if man were able by his own power to merit
for himself the first beginnings of grace, then faith itself,
and justification which is based on faith, and the
beatific vision, would not be strictly graces.
</p>

<p>
As for the precise moment when prevenient grace begins
its work in the soul, the common opinion is that
the very first judgment which a man forms as to the
credibility of divine revelation
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>iudicium credibilitatis</foreign>) is determined
by the immediate grace of the intellect,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V.
supra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> sqq.,
<ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> sq.</note>
and that the subsequent <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>affectus
credulitatis</foreign> springs from
the strengthening grace of the will. St. Augustine,
commenting on 2 Cor. III, 5, demonstrates this as follows:
</p>

<p>
<q>Let them give attention to this, and well weigh
these words, who think that the beginning of faith is
of ourselves, and the increase of faith is of God. For
who cannot see that thinking is prior to believing? For
no one believes anything unless he has first thought that
it is to be believed.... Therefore, in what pertains to
religion and piety [of which the Apostle was speaking],
if we are not capable of thinking anything as of ourselves,
but our sufficiency is of God, we are certainly not
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
capable of believing anything as of ourselves, since we
cannot do this without thinking, but our sufficiency, by
which we begin to believe, is of God.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Praedest. Sanct.</hi>, c. 2, p. 5:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Attendant hic et verba perpendant,
qui putant ex nobis esse fidei coeptum
et ex Deo esse fidei supplementum.
Quis enim non videat prius
esse cogitare quam credere? Nullus
quippe credit aliquid nisi prius
cogitaverit esse credendum....
Quod ergo pertinet ad religionem
atque pietatem, si non sumus idonei
cogitare aliquid quasi ex nobismet
ipsis, sed sufficientia nostra ex Deo
est, profecto non sumus idonei
credere aliquid quasi ex nobismet
ipsis, quod sine cogitatione non
possumus, sed sufficientia nostra, quâ
credere incipiamus, ex Deo est.</foreign></q>&mdash;Cfr.
also the seventh canon of the
Second Council of Orange (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 180), and
Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Fide</hi>, disp. 6, sect. 7 sq.;
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Idem</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, III, 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis II: The sinner, even after he has received
the faith, stands in absolute need of prevenient and co-operating
grace for every single salutary act required
in the process of justification.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This proposition also embodies an article of
faith.
</p>

<p>
Proof. The Semipelagians ascribed the dispositions
necessary for justification to the natural
efforts of the will, thereby denying the necessity
of prevenient grace. This teaching was condemned
as heretical by the Second Council of Orange
(A. D. 529),<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Arausic.</hi>
II, can. 7.</note> and again by the Council of
Trent, which defined: <q>If any one saith that
without the prevenient inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, and without His help, man can believe,
hope, love, or be penitent as he ought, so that the
grace of justification may be bestowed upon him;
let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI,
can. 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, sine praeveniente Spiritus
Sancti inspiratione atque eius adiutorio hominem credere, sperare, diligere
aut poenitere posse, sicut
oportet, ut ei iustificationis gratia
conferatur, anathema sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 813.)</note>
</p>

<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>

<p>
a) The Scriptural texts which we have quoted
against Pelagianism<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> sqq.</note> also apply to the Semipelagian
heresy.
</p>

<p>
Our Lord's dictum: <q>Without me you can do nothing,</q><note place='foot'>John
XV, 5: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sine me nihil
potestis facere.</foreign></q></note>
proves the necessity of prevenient and co-operating
grace, not only at the beginning of every salutary
act, but also for its continuation and completion.
St. Augustine clearly perceived this. <q>That he might
furnish a reply to the future Pelagius,</q> he observes,
<q>our Lord does not say: Without me you can with difficulty
do anything; but He says: Without me you can
do <emph>nothing</emph>.... He does not say: Without me you can
<emph>perfect</emph> nothing, but <emph>do</emph> nothing. For if He had said
<emph>perfect</emph>, they might say that God's aid is necessary, not
for beginning good, which is of ourselves, but for perfecting
it.... For when the Lord says, Without me
you can do nothing, in this one word He comprehends
both the beginning and the end.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra
Duas Epistolas Pelag.</hi>,
II, 8: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dominus ut responderet
futuro Pelagio non ait: Sine me
difficile potestis facere, sed ait: Sine
me nihil potestis facere.... Non
ait: sine me nihil potestis perficere,
sed facere. Hoc uno verbo initium
finemque comprehendit.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
St. Paul expressly ascribes the salvation of man to
grace when he says: <q>... with fear and trembling
work out your salvation; for it is God who worketh in
you, both to will and to accomplish.</q><note place='foot'>Phil.
II, 12 sq.: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cum metu
et tremore vestram salutem</foreign>
(σωτηρίαν) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>operamini; Deus est
enim qui operatur in vobis et velle
et perficere.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
The Tridentine Council, as we have seen, designates
the four salutary acts of faith, hope, love, and penitence
as a preparation for justification. Now St. Paul teaches:
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
<q>The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing,
that you may abound in hope and in the power
of the Holy Ghost;</q><note place='foot'>Rom. XV, 13:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus autem
spei repleat vos omni gaudio et pace
in credendo</foreign>
(ἐν τῷ πιστεύειν), <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ut
abundetis in spe (ἐν τῇ ἐλπίδι) et
virtute Spiritus Sancti.</foreign></q></note> and St. John: <q>Charity is of
God.</q><note place='foot'>1 John IV, 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Caritas ex
Deo est</foreign> (ἡ ἀγάπη ἐκ τοῦ Θεοῦ
ἐστιν).</q> Cfr. also John VI, 44 sqq.,
which text is fully explained by
Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 128
sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) The argument from Tradition is chiefly
based on St. Augustine, who in his two treatises
against the Semipelagians, and likewise in his
earlier writings, inculcates the necessity of grace
for all stages on the way to salvation.
</p>

<p>
Thus he writes in his <hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>: <q>Surely, if no
Christian will dare to say this: It is not of God that
showeth mercy, but of man that willeth, lest he should
openly contradict the Apostle, it follows that the true
interpretation of the saying (Rom. IX, 16): <q>It is not
of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of
God that showeth mercy,</q> is that the whole work belongs
to God, who both prepares the good will that is to
be helped, and assists it when it is prepared. For the good
will of man precedes many of God's gifts, but not all; and
it must itself be included among those which it does not
precede. We read in Holy Scripture, both <q>God's mercy
shall prevent me</q> (Ps. LVIII, 11), and <q>Thy mercy will
follow me</q> (Ps. XXII, 6). It precedes the unwilling to
make him willing; it follows the willing to render his will
effectual. Why are we taught to pray for our enemies,
who are plainly unwilling to lead a holy life, unless it
be that God may work willingness in them? And why
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
are we admonished to ask that we may receive, unless
it be that He who has created in us the wish, may Himself
satisfy the same? We pray, then, for our enemies,
that the mercy of God may precede them, as it has
preceded us; we pray for ourselves, that His mercy may
follow us.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>,
c. 32: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Porro si
nullus dicere Christianus audebit:
Non miserentis est Dei, sed volentis
est hominis, ne Apostolo apertissime
contradicat, restat ut propterea dictum
intelligatur (Rom. IX, 16):
<q>Non volentis neque currentis, sed
miserentis est Dei,</q> ut totum Deo
detur, qui hominis voluntatem bonam
et praeparat adiuvandam et adiuvat
praeparatam. Praecedit enim bona
voluntas hominis multa Dei dona, sed
non omnia; quae autem non praecedit
ipsa, in iis est et ipsa. Nam
utrumque legitur in sanctis eloquiis:
et (Ps. LVIII, 11): <q>Misericordia
eius praeveniet me,</q> et (Ps. XXII,
6): <q>Misericordia eius subsequetur
me.</q> Nolentem praevenit, ut
velit; volentem subsequitur, ne
frustra velit. Cur enim admonemur
orare pro inimicis nostris, utique
nolentibus pie vivere, nisi ut Deus
in illis operetur et velle? Itemque
cur admonemur petere ut accipiamus,
nisi ut ab illo fiat quod volumus, a
quo factum est ut velimus? Oramus
ergo pro inimicis nostris, ut
misericordia Dei praeveniat eos,
sicut praevenit et nos; oramus
autem pro nobis, ut misericordia
eius subsequatur nos.</foreign></q> On this important
passage cfr. J. B. Faure,
<hi rend='italic'>Notae in Enchiridion S. Augustini</hi>,
c. 32. Similar expressions will be
found in <hi rend='italic'>Contra Duas Epist. Pelag.</hi>,
II, 9 and <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia et Lib. Arb.</hi>,
c. 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
That grace accompanies us uninterruptedly on the
way to Heaven is also the teaching of St. Jerome: <q>To
will and to run is my own act; but without the constant
aid of God, even my own act will not be mine; for
the Apostle says (Phil. II, 13): <q>It is God who worketh
in you, both to will and to accomplish.</q>... It is
not sufficient for me that He gave it once, unless He
gives it always.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.
ad Ctesiph.</hi>, 133: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Velle
et currere meum est, sed ipsum
meum sine Dei semper auxilio non
erit meum; dicit enim Apostolus
(Phil. II, 13): <q>Deus est enim qui
operatur in vobis et velle et perficere.</q>...
Non mihi sufficit, quod
semel donavit, nisi semper donaverit.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
St. Ephraem Syrus prays in the name of the Oriental
Church: <q>I possess nothing, and if I possess anything,
Thou [O God] hast given it to me.... I ask only for
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
grace and acknowledge that I shall be saved through
Thee.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Serm. de Pret. Marg.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The Second Council of Orange summarizes the teaching
of Tradition on the subject under consideration.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Arausic.</hi> II. (A. D. 529);
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hoc etiam salubriter profitemur
et credimus, quod in omni opere
bono non nos incipimus et postea
per Dei misericordiam adiuvamur,
sed ipse nobis nullis praecedentibus
bonis meritis et fidem et amorem sui
prius inspirat, ut et baptismi sacramenta
fideliter requiramus et post
baptismum cum ipsius adiutorio ea,
quae sibi sunt placita, implere possimus.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
200.)</note>
</p>

<p>
c) The theological argument for our thesis is
based on the character of the adoptive sonship resulting
from the process of justification.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 192 sqq.</note> This
sonship (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>filiatio adoptiva</foreign>)
is essentially supernatural,
and hence can be attained only by strictly
supernatural acts, which unaided nature is
both morally and physically incapable of performing.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>,
pp. 132 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis III: Even in the state of sanctifying grace
man is not able to perform salutary acts, unless aided
by actual graces.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This is likewise <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de fide</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. The faculties of the just man are permanently
kept in the supernatural sphere by sanctifying
grace and by the habits of faith, hope, and
charity. Hence the just man in the performance
of salutary acts does not require the same measure
of prevenient grace as the unregenerate sinner,
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
who lacks all, or at least some, of the habits mentioned.
</p>

<p>
The question here at issue, therefore, can only be:
Is actual grace (as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
excitans s. vocans</foreign>, not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>elevans</foreign>)
absolutely necessary to enable a man in the state of
sanctifying grace to perform salutary acts? The answer
is&mdash;Yes, and this teaching is so firmly grounded on Sacred
Scripture and Tradition, and so emphatically sanctioned
by the Church, that we do not hesitate to follow Perrone
in qualifying it as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de
fide</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Perrone, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, n. 203:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quaestio haec non ad scholasticas
quaestiones pertinet, sed est dogma
fidei ab Ecclesia definitum.</foreign></q></note> The councils in
their teaching on the necessity of grace, assert that necessity
alike for the justified and the unjustified. That of
Trent expressly declares: <q>Whereas Jesus Christ Himself
continually infuses His virtue into the justified,&mdash;as
the head into the members, and the vine into the branches,&mdash;and
this virtue always precedes and accompanies and
follows their good works, which without it could not in
any wise be pleasing and meritorious before God, we must
believe that nothing further is wanting to the justified....</q><note place='foot'>Sess.
VI, cap. 16: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quum
enim ille ipse Christus Iesus tamquam
caput in membra et tamquam
vitis in palmites in ipsos iustificatos
iugiter virtutem influat, quae virtus
bona eorum opera semper antecedit
et comitatur et subsequitur et sine
qua nullo pacto Deo grata et
meritoria esse possent, nihil ipsis
iustificatis amplius deesse credendum
est.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 809.) Cfr. Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Institutiones
Theologicae</hi>, Vol. III, pp. 41 sqq.,
Paris 1896.</note>
</p>

<p>
a) Our thesis can be easily proved from Holy
Scripture. We have already shown that the
Bible and Tradition make no distinction between
the different stages on the way to salvation, or
between different salutary acts, but indiscriminately
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
postulate for all the illuminating grace of
the intellect and the strengthening grace of
the will. It follows that to perform salutary acts
the justified no less than the unjustified
need actual grace. Our Saviour's pithy saying:
<q>Without me you can do nothing,</q><note place='foot'>John XV,
5.</note> was not addressed
to unbelievers or sinners, but to His Apostles,
who were in the state of sanctifying grace.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V.
supra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> sq. Other pertinent
Scriptural texts are: 2 Cor.
III, 5; Phil. II, 12 sq.; III, 13 sq.;
Heb. XIII, 21.</note>
</p>

<p>
This interpretation is fully borne out by Tradition.
St. Augustine, after laying it down as a general principle
that <q>We can of ourselves do nothing to effect good
works of piety without God either working that we
may will, or co-operating when we will,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia et Lib. Arb.</hi>, c. 17:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sine illo vel operante vel cooperante
quum volumus ad bona
pietatis opera nihil valemus.</foreign></q></note> says of justified
man in particular: <q>The Heavenly Physician
cures our maladies, not only that they may cease to exist,
but in order that we may ever afterwards be able
to walk aright,&mdash;a task to which we should be unequal,
even after our healing, were it not for His continued
help.... For just as the eye of the body, even
when completely sound, is unable to see, unless aided by
the brightness of light, so also man, even when fully justified,
is unable to lead a holy life, unless he be divinely assisted
by the eternal light of righteousness.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Natura et Gratia</hi>, c. 26:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mala nostra non ad hoc solum
medicus supernus sanat, ut illa iam
non sint, sed ut de cetero recte
ambulare possimus, quod quidem
etiam sani nonnisi illo adiuvante
poterimus.... Sicut oculus corporis
etiam plenissime sanus, nisi
candore lucis adiutus non potest
cernere, sic et homo etiam perfectissime
iustificatus, nisi aeternae luce
iustitiae divinitus adiuvetur, recte
non potest vivere.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
This agrees with the practice of the Church in exhorting
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
all men without exception, saints as well as
sinners, to pray: <q>Precede, we beseech Thee, O Lord,
our actions by Thy holy inspiration, and carry them on
by Thy gracious assistance, that every prayer and work
of ours may begin always from Thee, and through Thee
be happily ended.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Actiones
nostras, quaesumus
Domine, aspirando praeveni et adiuvando
prosequere, ut cuncta nostra
oratio et operatio a te semper incipiat
et per te coepta finiatur.</foreign></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Missale Romanum.</hi>) The argument
from Tradition is more fully
developed by Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Divina Actuali</hi>, thes. 28.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) Some theologians have been led by certain
speculative difficulties to deny the necessity of actual
grace in the state of justification.
</p>

<p>
Man in the state of justification, they argue, is endowed
with sanctifying grace, the supernatural habits
of faith, hope, and charity, and the infused moral virtues,
and consequently possesses all those qualifications
which are necessary to enable him to perform salutary
acts with the supernatural concurrence of God. Why
should the will, thus supernaturally equipped, require
the aid of additional actual graces to enable it to perform
strictly supernatural, and therefore salutary, actions?<note place='foot'>Thus
Molina (<hi rend='italic'>Concord.</hi>, qu.
14, art. 13 disp. 8), Bellarmine
(<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia et Lib. Arb.</hi>, VI, 15),
and Thomassin; the question is well
treated by Ruiz, <hi rend='italic'>De Providentia
Divina</hi>, disp. 41, sect. 5 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
We reply: The necessity of actual grace in the
state of justification is so clearly taught by divine Revelation
that no theological theory is tenable which denies
it. Besides, the objection we have briefly summarized
disregards some very essential considerations, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> that
there remains in man, even after justification, concupiscence,
which is accompanied by a certain weakness
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
that requires at least the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia sanans
sive medicinalis</foreign> to heal it.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische
Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII, § 399, Mainz 1897.</note> Furthermore,
a quiescent <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus</foreign> cannot
set itself in motion, but must be determined from without;
that is to say, in our case, it must be moved by
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia excitans</foreign>
to elicit supernatural thoughts and
to will supernatural acts. Just as a seed cannot sprout
without the aid of appropriate stimuli, so sanctifying
grace is incapable of bearing fruit unless stimulated by
the sunshine and moisture of actual graces. Man may
perform purely natural acts even though he be in the
supernatural state of grace; hence if any particular act
of his is to be truly supernatural and conducive to eternal
salvation, God must lend His special aid.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Ripalda,
<hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernaturali</hi>,
disp. 106, sect. 3 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis IV: Except by a special privilege of divine
grace, man, even though he be in the state of sanctifying
grace, is unable to avoid venial sin throughout life.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This is likewise <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de fide</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. The Pelagians held that man is able to avoid sin, nay to attain to absolute
impeccability,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Impeccantia</foreign>,
ἀναμαρτησία.</note>
without supernatural assistance. Against
this error the Second Council of Mileve (A. D.
416) defined: <q>It likewise hath pleased [the
holy Synod] that whoever holds that the words
of the Our Father: <q>Forgive us our trespasses,</q>
when pronounced by saintly men, are
pronounced in token of humility, but not truthfully,
should be anathema.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Item
placuit ut quicunque
ipsa verba dominicae orationis, ubi
dicimus: Dimitte nobis debita nostra,
ita volunt a sanctis dici, ut humiliter hoc, non veraciter dicatur, anathema
sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 108.)</note> Still more to the
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
point is the following declaration of the Council of
Trent: <q>If any one saith that a man once
justified ... is able, during his whole life, to
avoid all sins, even those that are venial, except
by a special grace from God, as the Church holds
in regard of the Blessed Virgin; let him be
anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 23:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
hominem semel iustificatum dixerit ...
posse in tota vita peccata
omnia etiam venialia vitare nisi
ex speciali Dei privilegio, quemadmodum
de beata virgine tenet Ecclesia,
anathema sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 833.)</note>
</p>

<p>
To obtain a better understanding of this Tridentine
definition it will be well to ponder the following considerations:
</p>

<p>
The Council declares that it is impossible for man,
even in the state of sanctifying grace, to avoid all sins
during his whole life, except by virtue of a special privilege
such as that enjoyed by the Blessed Virgin Mary.<note place='foot'>On
this privilege of our Blessed
Lady see Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>Mariology</hi>,
pp. 72 sqq., St. Louis 1914.</note>
A venial sin is one which, because of the unimportance
of the precept involved, or in consequence of incomplete
consent, does not destroy the state of grace. Such
a sin may be either deliberate or semi-deliberate. A
semi-deliberate venial sin is one committed in haste
or surprise. It is chiefly sins of this kind that the
Tridentine Council had in view. For no one would
seriously assert that with the aid of divine grace a saint
could not avoid at least all deliberate venial sins for a
considerable length of time. The phrase
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in tota vita</foreign></q>
indicates a period of some length, though its limits are
rather difficult to determine. Were a man to die immediately
after justification, the Tridentine canon would
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per accidens</foreign>
not apply to him. As the Council says in
another place that <q>men, how holy and just soever, at
times fall into at least light and daily sins, which are also
called venial,</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 11:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>...
quantumvis sancti et iusti in levia
saltem et quotidiana, quae etiam
venialia dicuntur, peccata quandoque
cadunt.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
804.)</note> it is safe practically to limit the period
of possible freedom from venial sin to one day. Theoretically,
of course, it may be extended much farther.
The phrase <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>omnia
peccata</foreign></q> must be interpreted collectively,
not distributively, for a sin that could not be avoided
would cease to be a sin. For the same reason the term
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non posse</foreign></q>
must be understood of (moral, not physical)
disability; in other words, the difficulty of avoiding sin
with the aid of ordinary graces for any considerable
length of time, is insuperable even for the just. This
moral impossibility of avoiding sin can be removed only
by a special privilege, such as that enjoyed by the
Blessed Virgin Mary. It may incidentally be asked
whether this privilege was also granted to other saints,
notably St. Joseph and St. John the Baptist. Suarez lays
it down as a theological conclusion that no human being
has ever been or ever will be able entirely to avoid
venial sin except by a special privilege, which must in
each case be proved. Palmieri maintains that the moral
impossibility of leading an absolutely sinless life without
the special assistance of grace is taught by indirection in
the canons of Mileve (416) and Carthage (418), which
declare that no such life has ever been led by mortal man
without that assistance.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>, p.
236.</note>
</p>

<p>
a) The Scriptural argument for our thesis was
fully developed by the councils just mentioned.
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
The careful student will note, however, that those
texts only are strictly conclusive which positively
and exclusively refer to venial sins. Thus when
St. James says: <q>In many things we all offend,</q><note place='foot'>Epistle
of St. James, III, 2:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In multis enim offendimus omnes</foreign>
(πολλὰ γὰρ πταίομεν ἄπαντες).</q></note>
he cannot mean that all Christians now
and then necessarily commit mortal sin. For St.
John expressly declares that <q>Whosoever abideth
in him [Christ], sinneth not.</q><note place='foot'>1 John
III, 6: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnis qui in
eo [scil. Christo] manet, non
peccat.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
It follows that not even the just can wholly
avoid venial sin. Hence the most devout and
pious Christian may truthfully repeat the petition
of the Lord's Prayer which says: <q>Forgive us
our trespasses,<note place='foot'>ὀφειλήματα.</note> as we forgive those who trespass
against us.</q><note place='foot'>Matth. VI, 12. Cfr. Mark XI, 25.</note>
Profoundly conscious of the sinfulness
of the entire human race, the author of
the Book of Proverbs exclaims: <q>Who can say,
My heart is clean, I am pure from sin?</q><note place='foot'>Prov.
XX, 9: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quis potest
dicere: Mundum est cor meum,
purus sum a peccato?</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
Other Scripture texts commonly cited in confirmation
of our thesis lack cogency, because they either deal
exclusively with mortal sin or do not refer to sin
at all. Thus Prov. XXIV, 16: <q>A just man shall fall
seven times and shall rise again,</q> is meant of temporal
adversities.<note place='foot'>On this text cfr. J. V. Bainvel,
<hi rend='italic'>Les Contresens Bibliques des
Prédicateurs</hi>, 2nd ed., pp. 102 sq.,
Paris 1906: <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>... ces chutes sont
surtout les souffrances, les tribulations.
Le contexte l'indique clairement:
<q>N'attaquez pas le juste
(15); car Dieu le defend, et s'il
tombe il se relèvera; mais pour
l'impie c'est la ruine irréparable.</q>
Peut-on, comme on le fait d'ordinaire,
entendre le texte des chutes
morales, des péchés véniels? Plusieurs
commentateurs répondent:
non; et ils citent à l'appui saint
Augustin: Septies cadet iustus et
resurget, id est, quotiescumque
cediderit, non peribit: quod non de
iniquitatibus, sed de tribulationibus
ad humilitatem perducentibus intelligi
voluit</foreign> (Civ. D. xi, 31).&mdash;<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>D'autres
Pères, saint Jérôme par exemple,
sont moins exclusifs; et de
fait, pourquoi la maxime, dans sa
plénitude, ne comprendrait-elle pas
toutes sortes de chutes, péchés ou
afflictions? En tout cas, c'est aller
trop loin que de vouloir prouver par
là la thèse catholique sur l'impossibilité
morale d'éviter pendant longtemps
tout péché de fragilité.
L'écrivain sacré veut dire autre
chose, et nous avons des textes
meilleures</foreign> ...</q></note> Eccles. VII, 21: <q>There is no just man
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
upon earth, that doth good and sinneth not,</q><note place='foot'>Eccles.
VII, 21: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non est
enim homo iustus in terra, qui
faciat bonum et non peccet</foreign>.</q></note> can
scarcely be understood of venial sin, because the sacred
writer continues: <q>For thy conscience knoweth that thou also
hast often spoken evil of others.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
v, 23: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Scit enim conscientia
tua, quia et tu crebro
maledixisti aliis</foreign>.</q></note> 1 John
I, 8: <q>If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves,
and the truth is not in us,</q><note place='foot'>1 John I, 8:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si dixerimus,
quoniam peccatum non habemus,
ipsi nos seducimus et veritas in
nobis non est</foreign>.</q></note> would be a splendid
argument for our thesis, could it be shown that
the Apostle had in mind only the venial sins committed
in the state of justification. This is, however,
unlikely, as the term <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>peccatum</foreign>
throughout St. John's
first Epistle<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>
1 John I, 10, III, 4, III
8, <hi rend='italic'>et passim</hi>.</note> is obviously employed in the sense of
mortal sin.<note place='foot'>The Johannine text here under
consideration does, however, furnish
a telling argument against the Pelagians,
in so far as they denied the
necessity of the atonement. The
passage is effectively employed for
this purpose by the Second Council
of Mileve (can. 6, quoted in Denzinger-Bannwart's
<hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>, n.
106). Cfr. Chr. Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelectiones
Dogmaticae</hi>, Vol. V, 3rd ed.,
p. 99 and Al. Wurm, <hi rend='italic'>Die Irrlehrer
im ersten Johannesbrief</hi>, Freiburg
1903.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) Tradition is again most effectively voiced
by St. Augustine, who writes: <q>There are three
points, as you know, which the Catholic Church
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
chiefly maintains against them [the Pelagians].
One is, that the grace of God is not given according
to our merits.... The second, that no one
lives in this corruptible body in righteousness of
any degree without sins of any kind. The third,
that man is born obnoxious to the first man's
sin....</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Dono Perseverantiae</hi>, c. 2,
n. 4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Tria sunt, ut scitis, quae
maxime adversus eos [scil. Pelagianos]
defendit Ecclesia, quorum
est unum, gratiam Dei non secundum
merita nostra dari.... Alterum est,
in quantacunque iustitia sine qualibuscunque
peccatis in hoc corruptibili
corpore neminem vivere. Tertium
est, obnoxium nasci hominem
peccato primi hominis</foreign>.</q></note> To Pelagius' objection: <q>If all
men sin, then the just must die in their sins,</q> the
holy Doctor replies: <q>With all his acuteness he
[Pelagius] overlooks the circumstance that even
righteous persons pray with good reason: <q>Forgive
us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.</q>...
Even if we cannot live without sin, we may yet
die without sin, whilst the sin committed in ignorance or infirmity
is blotted out in merciful forgiveness.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Natura et Gratia</hi>, c. 35, n.
41: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ubi parum attendit, quum
sit acutissimus, non frustra etiam
iustos in oratione dicere: Dimitte
nobis debita nostra.... Etiamsi
hic non vivatur sine peccato, licet
mori sine peccato, dum subinde
veniâ deletur, quod subinde ignorantiâ
vel infirmitate committitur</foreign>.</q></note>
In another chapter of the same
treatise he says: <q>If ... we could assemble all
the afore-mentioned holy men and women, and
ask them whether they lived without sin, ...
would they not all exclaim with one voice: <q>If
we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and
the truth is not in us</q>?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
c. 36. <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si omnes illos
sanctos et sanctas, quum hic viverent, congregare possemus et interrogare,
utrum essent sine peccato, ...
nonne unâ voce clamassent: Si
dixerimus quia peccatum non habemus,
ipsi nos seducimus et veritas
in nobis non est?</foreign></q>&mdash;For other confirmatory
Patristic texts see Suarez,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, IX, 8.</note>
</p>

<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>

<p>
c) We come to the theological argument. The
moral impossibility of avoiding venial sin for any
considerable length of time results partly from
the infirmity of human nature
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>infirmitas naturae</foreign>),
partly from God's pre-established plan of
salvation (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ordo divinae providentiae</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
α) The infirmity of human nature flows from four
separate and distinct sources: (1) concupiscence (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fomes
peccati</foreign>); (2) imperfection of the ethical judgment
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>imperfectio iudicii</foreign>);
(3) inconstancy of the will (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inconstantia
voluntatis</foreign>); and (4) the weariness caused by continued
resistance to temptation. In view of these agencies
and their combined attack upon the will, theologians speak
of a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas antecedens
peccandi</foreign>;&mdash;not as if the
will were predestined to succumb to any one temptation
in particular, but in the sense that it is morally
unable to resist the whole series
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>suppositione disiunctâ</foreign>).
The will simply grows weaker and weaker,
and in course of time fails to resist sin with sufficient
energy.
</p>

<p>
Let us exemplify. The proofsheets of a book are
scrutinized by several trained readers, yet in spite of
the greatest care and many ingenious devices for the
elimination of error, a perfect book, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> one entirely
free from mistakes, is a practical impossibility. How
much harder must it be for man to avoid moral lapses
throughout his whole life, considering that he cannot
choose his own time for meeting temptations, but must
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
keep his mind and will under constant control and be
prepared to resist the enemy at any moment.<note place='foot'>The above-quoted analogy is
taken from Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische
Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII, p.
81.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Thomas Aquinas says: <q>Man cannot avoid all
venial sin, because his sensual appetite is depraved.
True, reason is able to suppress the individual stirrings
of this appetite. In fact, it is on this account that they
are voluntary and partake of the nature of sin. But
reason is not able to suppress them all [collectively],
because, while it tries to resist one, there perhaps arises
another, and, furthermore, reason is not always in a
condition to exercise the vigilance necessary to avoid
such impulses.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 109,
art. 8: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non potest homo abstinere
ab omni peccato veniali propter corruptionem
inferioris appetitus sensualitatis,
cuius motus singulos quidem
ratio reprimere potest, et ex
hoc habent rationem peccati et voluntarii,
non autem omnes, quia
dum uni resistere nititur, fortassis
alius insurgit, et etiam quia ratio
non potest semper esse pervigil ad
huiusmodi motus vitandos</foreign>.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
It follows that the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas peccandi antecedens</foreign>
does not destroy the liberty of the will or the moral
imputability of those venial sins which a man actually
commits; for it is merely a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas
indeterminata</foreign>,
which refers not to certain particular instances, but
to the one or other indeterminately. It follows further
that God does not command the impossible when He
insists that we should avoid venial sin, for He does not in
each single case command something which is physically
or morally impossible,<note place='foot'>Sardagna
(<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, n. 336)
incorrectly asserts this.</note> but merely demands a perfection
which in itself is not entirely unattainable
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>hic et nunc</foreign>
with the assistance of ordinary grace.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Instit. Theolog.</hi>,
Vol. III. pp. 47 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) The second theological reason for the impossibility
of avoiding venial sin for any considerable time is based
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
on the eternal scheme of salvation decreed by Divine
Providence. This scheme of salvation must not, of
course, be conceived as a divine precept to commit venial
sins. It is merely a wise toleration of sin and a just refusal,
on the part of the Almighty, to restore the human
race to that entirely unmerited state of freedom
from concupiscence with which it was endowed in Paradise,
and which alone could guarantee the moral possibility
of unspotted innocence. Both factors in their
last analysis are based upon the will of God to exercise
those whom He has justified in humility and to safeguard
us against pride, which is the deadliest enemy
of our salvation.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>Contra
Iulian.</hi>, IV, 3, 28: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ideo factum
est in loco infirmitatis, ne superbe
viveremus, ut sub quotidiana peccatorum
remissione vivamus</foreign>.</q></note> In making this wise decree God, of
course, infallibly foresaw that no man (with the sole
exception of those to whom He might grant a special
privilege) would <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de
facto</foreign> be able to pass through life
without committing venial sins. This infallible foreknowledge
is based not alone on the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia media</foreign>, but
also on the infirmity of human nature.
</p>

<p>
Hence Suarez was entirely justified in rejecting the
singular opinion of de Vega,<note place='foot'>Andr. de Vega,
<hi rend='italic'>De Iustificatione
Doctrina Universa</hi>, 1. XIV,
cap. ult.</note> that the Tridentine definition
does not exclude the possibility of exceptions.<note place='foot'>Suarez,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, IX, 8, 14:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quia si vel in uno homine
posset contingere, ut illa duo coniungerentur,
scil. carere speciali
privilegio et nihilominus cavere
omne peccatum veniale per totam
vitam, propositio Concilii esset simpliciter
falsa; nam est absoluta et
universalis, ad cuius falsitatem satis
est quod in uno deficiat</foreign>.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless the faithful are wisely warned against
both indifference and despondency. <q>Let no one say
that he is without sin, but let us not for this reason
love sin. Let us detest sin, brethren. Though we are
not without sins, let us hate them; especially let us
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
avoid grievous sins, and venial sins, too, as much as we
can.</q><note place='foot'>Aug., <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>,
181, n. 8: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nemo
itaque dicat, se esse sine peccato,
sed non tamen ideo debemus amare
peccatum. Oderimus ea, fratres;
etsi non sumus sine peccatis, oderimus
tamen ea, et maxime a criminibus
nos abstineamus; abstineamus
quantum possumus a levibus peccatis.</foreign></q>&mdash;On
the whole subject of this
thesis cfr. Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>,
pp. 181 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis V: No man can persevere in righteousness
without special help from God.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This proposition is also <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de fide</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. The Semipelagians asserted that man is
able by his own power to persevere in righteousness
to the end.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>, pp.
<ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> sqq.</note> Against this teaching the
Second Council of Orange defined: <q>Even those
who are reborn and holy must implore the help
of God, in order that they may be enabled to
attain the good end, or to persevere in the good
work.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Arausic.</hi> II, can. 10:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Adiutorium Dei etiam renatis ac
sanctis semper est implorandum, ut
ad finem bonum pervenire vel in
bono possint opere perdurare</foreign>.</q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 183.)</note> This definition was repeated in substance
by the Council of Trent: <q>If any one
saith that the justified either is able without the
special help of God to persevere in the justice received,
or that, with that help, he is not able; let
him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 22:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, iustificatum vel sine speciali
auxilio Dei in accepta iustitia perseverare
posse vel cum eo non posse,
anathema sit</foreign>.</q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 832.)</note>
</p>

<p>
Perfect perseverance is the preservation of baptismal
innocence, or, in a less strict sense, of the state of
grace, until death. Imperfect perseverance is a temporary
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
continuance in grace, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> for a month or a year,
until the next mortal sin. Imperfect perseverance, according
to the Tridentine Council, requires no special
divine assistance (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>speciale
auxilium</foreign>).<note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 11:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus
namque suâ gratiâ semel iustificatos
non deserit, nisi ab eis prius
deseratur</foreign>.</q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 804.)</note>
</p>

<p>
Final perseverance is either passive or active, according
as the justified dies in the state of grace irrespective of his
will (as baptized children and insane adults),<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Wisd. IV, 11: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Raptus
est, ne malitia mutaret intellectum
eius</foreign>.</q></note> or actively
coöperates with grace whenever the state of grace is imperilled
by grievous temptation. The Council of Trent
has especially this latter case in view when it speaks of
the necessity of a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>speciale
auxilium</foreign>, because the special
help extended by God presupposes coöperation with grace,
and man cannot strictly speaking coöperate in a happy
death. The Council purposely speaks of an
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>auxilium</foreign>, not
a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>privilegium</foreign>,
because a privilege is by its very nature
granted to but few, while the special help of grace extends
to all the elect. This <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>auxilium</foreign>
is designated as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>speciale</foreign>,
because final perseverance is not conferred with sanctifying
grace, nor is it a result of the mere power of
perseverance (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>posse
perseverare</foreign>). The state of sanctifying
grace simply confers a claim to ordinary graces,
while the power of perseverance of itself by no means
insures actual perseverance (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actu
perseverare</foreign>). The
power of perseverance is assured by those merely sufficient
graces which are constantly at the command of
the righteous. Actual perseverance, on the other hand,
implies a series of efficacious graces. God is under no
obligation to bestow more than sufficient grace on any
man; consequently, final perseverance is a special grace,
or, more correctly, a continuous series of efficacious graces.
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
The Council of Trent is therefore justified in speaking
of it as <q>a great gift.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 16:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>magnum
illud usque in finem perseverantiae
donum</foreign>.</q> On St. Augustine's
teaching in regard to the
different heads of doctrine defined
above, see Chr. Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelectiones
Dogmaticae</hi>, Vol. V, 3rd ed., pp. 103
sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
a) Sacred Scripture represents final perseverance
as the fruit of prayer and as a special gift
not included in the bare notion of justification.
</p>

<p>
α) Our Divine Saviour Himself says in His prayer
for His disciples, John XVII, 11: <q>Holy Father, keep
them in thy name whom thou hast given me, that they
may be one, as we also are.</q><note place='foot'>John XVII, 11:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pater
sancte, serva eos in nomine tuo</foreign>
(τήρησον αὐτοὺς ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί
σου), <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quos dedisti mihi, ut sint
unum, sicut et nos</foreign>.</q></note> St. Paul teaches in his
Epistle to the Colossians: <q>Epaphras saluteth you ...
who is always solicitous for you in prayers, that you
may stand perfect and full in all the will of God.</q><note place='foot'>Col. IV, 12:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Salutat vos
Epaphras ... semper sollicitus pro
vobis in orationibus, ut stetis perfecti</foreign>
(ἵνα στῆτε τέλειοι) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>et pleni
in omni voluntate Dei</foreign>.</q></note>
Hence the necessity of constantly watching and praying:
<q>Watch ye and pray that ye enter not into temptation.</q><note place='foot'>Matth.
XXVI, 41: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vigilate,
et orate, ut non intretis in tentationem</foreign>.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
β) That perseverance is not included in the bare notion
of justification appears from such passages as these:
Phil. I, 6: <q>Being confident of this very thing, that he
who hath begun a good work in you, will perfect it unto
the day of Christ Jesus.</q><note place='foot'>Phil. I, 6:
<q>... <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>confidens hoc
ipsum, quia qui coepit in vobis opus
bonum, perficiet</foreign> (ἐπιτελέσει) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>usque
in diem Christi Iesu</foreign>.</q></note> 1 Pet. I, 5: <q>Who, by the
power of God, are kept by faith unto salvation, ready to
be revealed in the last time.</q><note place='foot'>1 Pet. I, 5:
<q>...<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>qui in
virtute Dei custodimini per fidem
in salutem, paratam revelari in
tempore novissimo</foreign>.</q>&mdash;For Old
Testament texts in confirmation of
this thesis see Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Divina</hi>, pp. 198 sq.</note>
</p>

<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>

<p>
b) The threads of Tradition run together in
the hands of St. Augustine, who has written a
special treatise On the Gift of Perseverance.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Dono Perseverantiae</hi>. An
English translation of this treatise
may be found in <hi rend='italic'>The Anti-Pelagian
Works of Saint Augustine, Bishop
of Hippo</hi>, Translated by Peter
Holmes and R. E. Wallis, Vol. III,
pp. 171 sqq. (Vol. XV of Dods'
translation of the <hi rend='italic'>Works of St.
Augustine</hi>), Edinburg 1876.</note>
</p>

<p>
His main argument is based on the necessity of prayer.
<q>Why,</q> he asks, <q>is that perseverance asked for from
God, if it is not given by God? Is it a mocking petition
inasmuch as that is asked of Him which it is known
He does not give, but, although He gives it not, is in
man's power?... Or is not that perseverance, perchance,
asked for from Him? He who says this, is not to
be rebuked by my arguments, but must be overwhelmed
with the prayers of the saints. Is there indeed one among
them who do not ask for themselves from God that they
may persevere in Him, when in that very prayer which is
called the Lord's&mdash;because the Lord taught it&mdash;whenever
it is prayed by the saints, scarcely anything else is understood
to be prayed for but perseverance?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Dono Perseverantiae</hi>, c.
2, n. 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cur autem perseverantia
ista poscitur a Deo, si non
datur a Deo? An et ista irrisoria
petitio est, quum id ab eo petitur
quod scitur non ipsum dare, sed ipso
non dante esse in hominis potestate?...
An ab illo perseverantia
ista forte non poscitur? Iam
hoc qui dicit, non meis disputationibus
refellendus, sed sanctorum orationibus
onerandus est. An vero
quisquam eorum est, qui non sibi
poscat a Deo ut perseveret in eo,
quum ipsâ oratione quae dominica
nuncupatur, quia eam Dominus
docuit, quando oratur a sanctis, nihil
paene aliud quam perseverantia
posci intelligatur</foreign>?</q></note> He then
proceeds to show, in accordance with St. Cyprian's little
treatise On the Lord's Prayer, that the seven petitions
of the <q>Our Father</q> are all prayers for perseverance,
and concludes as follows: <q>Truly in this matter let
not the Church look for laborious disputations, but consider
her own daily prayers. She prays that the unbelieving
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
may believe; therefore God converts to the faith.
She prays that believers may persevere; therefore God
gives perseverance to the end.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi>,
c. 7, n. 15: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Prorsus
in hac re non operosas disputationes
exspectet Ecclesia, sed attendat
quotidianas orationes suas. Orat
ut increduli credant: Deus ergo
convertit ad fidem. Orat ut credentes
perseverent; Deus ergo donat
perseverantiam usque in finem</foreign>.</q></note> And again: <q>For
who is there that would groan with a sincere desire to
receive what he prays for from the Lord, if he thought
that he received it from himself and not from the
Lord?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi>,
c. 23, n. 63: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quis
enim veraciter gemat desiderans accipere
quod orat a Domino, si hoc a
seipso se sumere existimet, non ab
illo</foreign>?</q></note>
</p>

<p>
c) From this teaching flows a corollary of
great practical importance, to wit: The grace of
final perseverance cannot be merited by good
works, but it can be obtained by pious and unremitting
prayer.
</p>

<p>
<q>This gift of God,</q> says St. Augustine, speaking of
final perseverance, <q>may be obtained suppliantly [by
prayer], but when it has been given, it cannot be lost
contumaciously.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi>,
c. 6, n. 10: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hoc
Dei donum suppliciter emereri potest,
sed quum datum fuerit, amitti
contumaciter non potest</foreign>.</q></note>
And again: <q>Since it is manifest that
God has prepared some things to be given even to those
who do not pray for them, such as the beginning of faith,
and other things not to be given except to those who pray
for them, such as perseverance unto the end, certainly he
who thinks that he has this latter from himself, does not
pray to obtain it.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi>,
c. 16, n. 39: <q>...
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quum constet Deum alia danda
etiam non orantibus, sicut initium
fidei, alia nonnisi orantibus praeparasse,
sicut in finem perseverantiam,
profecto qui ex se ipso se
hanc habere putat, non orat ut habeat</foreign>.</q></note>
</p>

<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>

<p>
Between merit (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum</foreign>)
and prayer (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>oratio, preces</foreign>)
there is this great difference, that merit appeals to God's
justice, prayer to His mercy. If man were able to merit
final perseverance by good works (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum
de condigno</foreign>),
God would be in justice bound to give him this
precious grace. But this is plainly incompatible with the
Catholic conception of final perseverance.
</p>

<p>
It may be asked: Is God determined by the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum
de congruo</foreign> inherent in all good works to grant the gift
of final perseverance as a reward to the righteous?
Theologians are at variance on this point. Ripalda<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Ente Supernaturali</hi>, disp.
94, sect. 2.</note>
thinks that this is the case at least with the more conspicuous
good works performed in the state of grace.
Suarez modifies this improbable contention somewhat by
saying that prayer alone can infallibly guarantee final
perseverance.<note place='foot'>Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, XII, 38:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Infallibilitas non convenit merito
de congruo ratione sui, ut ita dicam,
sed ratione impetrationis quae propriae
soli orationi, ut talis est, respondet.
Ratio est, quia haec infallibilitas
solum fundatur in promissione
divina, quae non invenitur
facta operibus iustorum quatenus
meritoriis de congruo, sed tantum
orationi; quare ut fructus huius
meriti certior sit, adiungenda semper
est petitio perseverantiae</foreign>.</q></note> Our prayers are infallibly heard if we
address the Father through Jesus Christ, because Christ
has promised: <q>If you ask the Father anything in my
name, he will give it you.</q><note place='foot'>John XVI,
23.</note> To insure its being infallibly
heard, prayer for perseverance must be made in the
state of grace and unremittingly. True, Christ did not
make sanctifying grace a necessary condition of efficacious
prayer. But, as Suarez points out, prayer cannot
be infallibly efficacious unless it proceeds from one who
is in the state of grace, because the moral conditions that
render it efficacious are found only in that state.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, XII,
38, n. 14: <q>... <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quia ut oratio
habeat perseverantiam debitam, perdurare
debet cum illis circumstantiis
moralibus, quas a principio
habere etiam debuit, ut congrue
fieret; unde eo ipso quod novum
impedimentum ponitur [peccando]
effectui orationis, deficit perseverantia
in orando, saltem debito
modo.</foreign></q></note> As to
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
the second point, if we say that prayer for perseverance
must be unremitting, we mean, in the words of the same
eminent theologian, that it must continue throughout life
and must be made with becoming trustfulness and zeal,
especially when there is a duty to be fulfilled or a temptation
to be overcome.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
n. 17: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Igitur perseverantia
orationis in tali materia
requisita est, ut non semel tantum
aut iterum fiat, set ut toto tempore
vitae duret, et praesertim ut in
occurrentibus occasionibus servandi
mandata aut vincendi tentationes
cum debita fiducia repetatur.</foreign></q>&mdash;For
more detailed information we must
refer the reader to Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>, thes. 36, n.
vi sqq. The theological argument
for our thesis is convincingly
set forth by Gutberlet
in Heinrich's <hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>,
Vol. VIII, § 404. The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>donum
perseverantiae</foreign> must not be confounded
with the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>confirmatio in
gratia</foreign>; on this point see Schiffini,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 197 sqq.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Readings</hi>:&mdash;Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>,
1. I-II.&mdash;*Tricassin, O. Cap., <hi rend='italic'>De Necessaria ad Salutem
Gratia</hi>.&mdash;Byonius, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratiae Auxiliis</hi>,
in Becanus, <hi rend='italic'>Theologia Scholastica</hi>, Rouen, 1658.&mdash;Scheeben
<hi rend='italic'>Natur und Gnade</hi>, Mainz 1861.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Idem</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatik</hi>, Vol. III, § 292-298,
Freiburg 1882.&mdash;*Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>,
thes. 19-29, Gulpen 1885.&mdash;Oswald, <hi rend='italic'>Lehre von der Heiligung</hi>,
§ 9-11, 3rd ed., Paderborn 1885.&mdash;Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Institutiones
Theologicae</hi>, Vol. III, pp. 8-51, Paris 1896.&mdash;*Heinrich-Gutberlet,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische
Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII, § 396-416, Mainz 1897.&mdash;Chr. Pesch,
<hi rend='italic'>Praelectiones Dogmaticae</hi>, Vol. V, 3rd ed., pp. 32 sqq., Freiburg
1908.&mdash;Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, disp. 2, Freiburg 1901.
</p>

<p>
On St. Augustine and his teaching cfr. *J. Ernst, <hi rend='italic'>Werke
und Tugenden der Ungläubigen nach Augustinus</hi>, Freiburg 1871.&mdash;F.
Wörter, <hi rend='italic'>Die Geistesentwicklung des hl. Augustinus bis zu
seiner Taufe</hi>, Paderborn 1898.&mdash;Wolfsgruber, <hi rend='italic'>Augustinus</hi>,
Paderborn 1898.&mdash;Boucat, <hi rend='italic'>Theologia Patrum
Dogmatico-Scholastico-Positiva</hi>,
disp. 3, Paris 1718.&mdash;*Zaccaria, <hi rend='italic'>Dissert. de Adiutorio sine quo
non</hi>, in the <hi rend='italic'>Thesaurus Theol.</hi>, Vol. V, Venice 1762.&mdash;O.
Rottmanner, O. S. B., <hi rend='italic'>Geistesfrüchte aus der Klosterzelle</hi>, München
1908.&mdash;B. J. Otten, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>A Manual of the History of Dogmas</hi>,
Vol. I, St. Louis 1917, pp. 306 sqq., 374 sq.
</p>

<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>

<p>
On the heresy of Pelagianism cfr. *F. Wörter, <hi rend='italic'>Der Pelagianismus
nach seinem Ursprung und seiner Lehre</hi>, Freiburg 1874.&mdash;F.
Klasen, <hi rend='italic'>Die innere Entwicklung des Pelagianismus</hi>, Freiburg
1882.&mdash;Schwane, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmengeschichte</hi>, Vol. II, 2nd ed., § 60
sqq., Freiburg 1895.&mdash;H. Zimmer, <hi rend='italic'>Pelagius in Irland</hi>, Berlin
1901.&mdash;Warfield, <hi rend='italic'>Two Studies in the History of Doctrine</hi>, New
York 1897.&mdash;Tixeront, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des Dogmes</hi>, Vol. II, 2nd ed.,
Paris 1909 (English tr., St. Louis 1914).&mdash;Pohle in the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic
Encyclopedia</hi>, Vol. XI, pp. 604-608.&mdash;B. J. Otten, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>A
Manual of the History of Dogmas</hi>, Vol. I, pp. 357 sqq.
</p>

<p>
On Semi-Pelagianism cfr. Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, Prolegom., V, 5
sqq.&mdash;Livinus Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>De Pelag. et Semipelag.
Erroribus.</hi>&mdash;Wiggers,
<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Semipelagianismus</hi>, Hamburg 1835.&mdash;A.
Hoch, <hi rend='italic'>Lehre des Johannes Cassianus von Natur und Gnade</hi>,
Freiburg 1895.&mdash;*A. Koch, <hi rend='italic'>Der hl. Faustus, Bischof von Riez</hi>,
Stuttgart 1895.&mdash;Fr. Wörter, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Dogmengeschichte des
Semipelagianismus</hi>, Münster 1900.&mdash;Sublet, <hi rend='italic'>Le
Semipélagianisme</hi>, Namur 1897.&mdash;Tixeront, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des
Dogmes</hi>, Vol. II, 2nd ed., Paris 1909 (English tr., St. Louis 1914).&mdash;Pohle in
the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic Encyclopedia</hi>, Vol. XIII, pp. 703-706.&mdash;B. J.
Otten, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>A Manual
of the History of Dogmas</hi>, Vol. I, pp. 379 sqq.
</p>

<p>
On Jansenism cfr. *Steph. Dechamps, <hi rend='italic'>De Haeresi Ianseniana</hi>, Paris
1645.&mdash;Ripalda, <hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernaturali</hi>, Vol. III: <q>Contra
Baium et Baianos,</q> Cologne 1648.&mdash;Duchesne, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire du
Baianisme</hi>, Douai 1731.&mdash;*Linsenmann, <hi rend='italic'>Michael Bajus und die
Grundlegung des Jansenismus</hi>, Tübingen 1867.&mdash;A. Schill, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Konstitution Unigenitus, ihre Veranlassung und ihre Folgen</hi>,
Freiburg 1876.&mdash;Ingold, <hi rend='italic'>Rome et France: La Seconde Phase du
Jansénisme</hi>, Paris 1901.&mdash;P. Minges, O. F. M., <hi rend='italic'>Die Gnadenlehre
des Duns Scotus auf ihren angeblichen Pelagianismus und Semipelagianismus
geprüft</hi>, Münster 1906.&mdash;Lafiteau, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la
Constitution Unigenitus</hi>, 2 vols., Liège 1738.&mdash;Van den Peereboom,
<hi rend='italic'>Cornelius Jansenius, Septième Évêque d'Ypres</hi>, Bruges 1882.&mdash;J.
Forget in the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic Encyclopedia</hi>, Vol. VIII, pp.
285-294.&mdash;B. J. Otten, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>A Manual of the History of
Dogmas</hi>, Vol. II, pp. 507 sqq.
</p>
</quote>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_2'/>
<head>Section 2. The Gratuity Of Actual Grace</head>

<p>
All grace <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex vi termini</foreign> is a free
gift.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>
sq.</note> This
applies particularly to Christian grace, which is
so absolutely gratuitous that its gratuity, together
with its necessity, may be called the groundwork
of the Catholic religion.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>State of the Question.</hi>&mdash;To show what is
meant by <q>gratuity</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratuitas</foreign>)
we must first
explain the technical term <q>merit.</q>
</p>

<p>
a) <q>Merit</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum</foreign>=that which is earned)
is that property of a good work which entitles the
performer to receive a reward from him to whose
advantage the work redounds.
</p>

<p>
α) An analysis of this definition shows that (1) merit
is found only in such works as are positively good;
(2) merit and reward are correlative terms which postulate
each other; (3) merit supposes two distinct persons,
one who deserves and another who awards; (4) the
relation between merit and reward is based on justice,
not on benevolence or mercy. The last-mentioned determination
is by far the most important of the four.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>,
1a 2ae, qu. 114, art. 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Meritum
et merces ad idem referuntur. Id
enim merces dicitur quod alicui
recompensatur pro retributione operis
vel laboris quasi quoddam pretium
ipsius. Unde sicut reddere iustum
pretium pro re accepta ab aliquo est
actus iustitiae, ita etiam recompensare
mercedem operis vel laboris
est actus iustitiae.</foreign></q> Cfr. Taparelli,
<hi rend='italic'>Saggio Teoretico del Diritto Naturale</hi>,
diss. 1, c. 6, n. 130, Palermo
1842.</note>
</p>

<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>

<p>
β) Ethics and theology clearly distinguish two
kinds of merit: (1) condign merit,<note place='foot'><q>This word is scarcely used in
modern English, except as expressing
that punishment which is fully
deserved, a usage originating with
the Tudor Parliaments; but it was
once commonly used in the language
in a wider sense, for whatever had
been justly earned, and some attempts
to revive it have been made
in recent times; certainly some word
is wanted to express the idea.</q>
(Hunter, <hi rend='italic'>Outlines of Dogmatic
Theology</hi>, Vol. III, pp. 58 sq.)
Cfr. Dr. Murray's <hi rend='italic'>New English Dictionary</hi>,
Vol. II, p. 784, Oxford
1893.</note> which is merit
in the strict sense (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum adaequatum sive de
condigno</foreign>), and (2) congruous merit (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum
inadaequatum sive de congruo</foreign>), so called because
of the congruity, or fitness, that the claim should
be recognized. Condign merit presupposes some
proportion between the work done and the reward
given in compensation for it (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>aequalitas s. condignitas
dati et accepti</foreign>). It is measured by commutative
justice and thus confers a real claim to
a reward. For example, a conscientious workman
has a strict claim to his wage. Owing to the
lack of intrinsic proportion between service and
reward, congruous merit can claim a remuneration
only on grounds of fairness.
</p>

<p>
A distinction between these two kinds of
merit was already made by the Fathers, though
not in the terms of present-day theology. It was
known to the older Scholastics and emphasized
anew by Luther's famous adversary Johann Eck.<note place='foot'>Eck
did not, however, approve
the term <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum de condigno</foreign>; he
preferred <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum digni</foreign>. Cfr. J.
Greving, <hi rend='italic'>Johann Eck als junger
Gelehrter</hi>, pp. 153 sqq., Münster
1906.</note>
</p>

<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>

<p>
No relation of strict justice is conceivable between
the Creator and His creatures. On the
part of God there can only be question of a gratuitous
promise to reward certain good works,&mdash;which
promise He is bound to keep because He is
veracious and faithful.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St.
Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>In Ps.</hi>, 86:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Debitorem Deus ipse fecit se, non
accipiendo, sed promittendo.</foreign></q> On
this point consult Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God:
His Knowability, Essence, and Attributes,</hi>
pp. 455 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) Two other terms must also be clearly defined
in order to arrive at a true conception of
the gratuity of Christian grace. They are prayer
for grace,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Oratio,
preces.</foreign></note> and a capacity or disposition to receive
it.<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Capacitas,
dispositio.</foreign></note> To pray means to incite God's liberality or
mercy by humble supplication.
</p>

<p>
α) Despite the contrary teaching of Vasquez<note place='foot'>Vasquez,
<hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S. Theol.
S. Thomae Aquin.</hi>, 1a 2ae, disp. 216,
c. 4.</note> and a
few other theologians, congruous merit and prayer are
really distinct because one can exist without the other.
As the angels in Heaven are able to pray for us without
earning a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum de
congruo</foreign>, so conversely, all salutary
works are meritorious even without prayer. Moreover,
humble supplication does not involve any positive
service entitled to a reward.
</p>

<p>
There is another important and obvious distinction,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: between purely natural prayer
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>preces naturae</foreign>)
and supernatural prayer inspired by grace
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>oratio supernaturalis</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
β) Capacity or disposition, especially when it
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
takes the form of preparation, may be either positive
or negative. Positive capacity is defined as
<q>that real mode by which a subject, in itself indifferent,
becomes apt to receive a new form.</q>
Such a capacity or disposition always entails a
claim to its respective form.
</p>

<p>
Positive capacity or disposition differs from both
prayer or quasi-merit (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum
de congruo</foreign>). Quasi-merit
is entitled to a reward on the ground of fairness,
whereas the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>capacitas
s. dispositio positiva</foreign> is at most the
fulfilment of an expectation based upon purely teleological
considerations. Again, a reward can be bestowed
upon some subject other than the one by whom the service
was rendered, whereas the introduction of a new
form necessarily supposes a subject disposed for or
prepared to receive it. Thus only he who is hungry is
disposed for the reception of food and entitled to have his
craving satisfied.
</p>

<p>
Negative capacity consists in the absence or removal
of obstacles that impede the reception of
a new form, as when green wood is dried to
become fit for burning.
</p>

<p>
c) There arises the important question whether
or not divine grace is an object of merit, and if
so, to what extent it can be merited by prayer and
preparation.
</p>

<p>
It is of faith that the just man, by the performance of
supernaturally good deeds, can merit
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de condigno</foreign> an increase
in the state of grace and eternal glory, and that
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
the sinner is able to earn justification
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de congruo</foreign>. On
the other hand, it is also an article of faith that divine
grace is strictly gratuitous.<note place='foot'>Already in the fourth century
the Church emphasized the proposition
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratiam Christi non secundum
merita dari</foreign></q> against Pelagius.</note> The two dogmas seem
incompatible, but they are not, as will become evident
if we consider that the good works of the just and the
salutary works of the sinner are entirely rooted in divine
grace and consequently the merits which they contain
are strictly merits of grace in no wise due to nature.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
St. Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> 194 <hi rend='italic'>ad
Sixt.</hi>, n. 19: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'><q>Vita etiam aeterna,
quam certum est bonis operibus
debitam reddi, ab Apostolo tamen
gratia nuncupatur, nec ideo quia
meritis non datur, sed quia data
sunt ipsa merita, quibus datur.</q></foreign>
The dogma was formally defined by
the Council of Trent: <q>... <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cuius
tanta est erga omnes homines bonitas,
ut eorum velit esse merita, quae
sunt ipsius dona.</foreign></q> (Sess. VI, cap.
16, quoted in Denzinger-Bannwart's
<hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>, n. 809.)</note>
When we speak of the absolute gratuity of grace, therefore,
we mean the very first or initial grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia prima
vocans</foreign>), by which the work of salvation is begun. Of
this initial grace the Church explicitly teaches that it is
absolutely incapable of being merited; whence it follows
that all subsequent graces, up to and including
justification, are also gratuitous,<note place='foot'>For further information on this
point see Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina
Actuali,</hi> thes. 35.</note> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> unmerited by nature
in strict justice, in so far as they are based on the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia prima</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Gratuity of Grace Proved From
Revelation</hi>.&mdash;Keeping the above explanation
well in mind we now proceed to demonstrate the
gratuity of divine grace in five systematic
theses.
</p>

<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_2_Thesis_I'/>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis I: Mere nature cannot, in strict justice (de
condigno), merit initial grace (gratia prima), nor, consequently,
any of the series of subsequent graces in the
order of justification.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This proposition embodies an article of faith.
</p>

<p>
Proof. It was one of the fundamental errors
of Pelagius that grace can be merited by purely
natural acts.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>, pp.
<ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> sqq.</note> When, at the instance of the bishops
assembled at Diospolis (A. D. 415), he retracted
his proposition that <q>the grace of God is given according
to our merits,</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratiam
Dei secundum merita
nostra dari.</foreign></q></note> he employed
the term <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia Dei</foreign>
dishonestly for the grace of
creation. The Second Council of Orange (A. D.
529) formally defined that grace cannot be merited, but is purely
and strictly gratuitous.<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Debetur
merces bonis operibus,
si fiant; sed gratia quae non
debetur praecedit, ut fiant.</foreign></q> (Arausic.
II, can. 18; see Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 191.)</note> And
the Council of Trent declared: <q>In adults the
beginning of justification is to be derived from
the prevenient grace of God through Jesus Christ,
that is to say, from His vocation, whereby, without
any merits existing on their parts, they are
called....</q><note place='foot'><q>... <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ipsius
iustificationis exordium
in adultis a Dei per Christum
Iesum praeveniente gratia
sumendum esse, h. e. ab eius vocatione,
quâ nullis eorum existentibus
meritis vocantur.</foreign></q> (Sess. VI,
cap. 5. Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 797.)</note> The non-existence of merits
prior to the bestowal of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>prima
gratia vocans,</foreign>
so positively asserted in this definition, plainly excludes
any and all natural merit <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de condigno.</foreign>
</p>

<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>

<p>
a) St. Paul demonstrates in his Epistle to the
Romans that justification does not result from
obedience to the law, but is a grace freely bestowed
by God.
</p>

<p>
The Apostle regards the merciful dispensations of
Providence in favor of the Chosen People, and of the entire
sinful race of men in general, as so many sheer graces.
Rom. IX, 16: <q>So then it is not of him that willeth,
nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth
mercy.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. IX, 16: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Igitur non
volentis neque currentis, sed miserentis
est Dei.</foreign></q></note> The gratuity of grace is asserted in terms
that almost sound extravagant two verses further down
in the same Epistle: <q>Therefore he hath mercy on
whom he will; and whom he will, he hardeneth.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. IX, 18:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ergo cuius
vult miseretur et quem vult indurat</foreign>
(ἄρα οὖν θέλει δ᾽ δε θέλει
σκληρύνει.</q>)</note> The
same truth is emphasized in Rom. XI, 6: <q>And if by
grace, it is not now by works: otherwise grace is no
more grace.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. XI, 6:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si autem gratiâ,
iam non ex operibus</foreign> (ἐξ ἔργων),
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>alioquin gratia iam non est
gratia.</foreign></q></note> Lest any one should pride himself on
having obtained faith, which is the root of justification, by
his own merits, St. Paul declares in his Epistle to the
Ephesians: <q>For by grace you are saved through faith,
and that not of yourselves, for it is the gift of God; not
of works, that no man may glory. For we are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus in good works, which
God hath prepared that we should walk in them.</q><note place='foot'>Eph.
II, 8-10: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratiâ enim
estis salvati per fidem et hoc non
ex vobis: Dei enim donum est, non
ex operibus, ut ne quis glorietur.
Ipsius enim sumus factura</foreign> (ποίημα),
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>creati in Christo Iesu in
operibus bonis, quae praeparavit
Deus, ut in illis ambulemus.</foreign></q></note>
These and many similar passages<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>,
2 Cor. V, 14; Gal. III,
22; 2 Tim. I, 9; Tit. III, 5; 1 Pet.
I, 3; 1 John IV, 10.</note> make it plain that
grace cannot be merited without supernatural aid.
</p>

<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>

<p>
b) The leading champion of the dogma of the
gratuity of grace among the Fathers is St. Augustine,
who never tires of repeating that <q>Grace
does not find merits, but causes them,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Tract,
in Ioa.</hi>, 86: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia
non invenit, sed efficit merita.</foreign></q></note> and
substantiates this fundamental principle thus:
<q>Grace has preceded thy merit; not grace by
merit, but merit by grace. For if grace is by merit, thou
hast bought, not received gratis.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Serm.</hi>,
169, c. 2: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'><q>Gratia
praecessit meritum tuum, non gratia
ex merito, sed meritum ex gratia.
Nam si gratia ex merito, emisti non
gratis accepisti.</q></foreign> Other Patristic
texts quoted by Ripalda, <hi rend='italic'>De Ente
Supernaturali,</hi> disp. 15 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) The theological argument is based (1) on
the disproportion between nature and grace and
(2) on the absolute necessity of grace for the
performance of salutary works.
</p>

<p>
There is no proportion between the natural and the
supernatural, and it would be a contradiction to say
that mere nature can span the chasm separating the two
orders. To assume the existence of a strict <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum
naturae</foreign> for it, would be to deny the gratuity as well as
the supernatural character of grace. To deny these
would be to deny grace itself and with it the whole supernatural
order that forms the groundwork of Christianity.
We know, on the other hand,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> sqq.</note> that grace is absolutely
indispensable for the performance of salutary acts.
Hence, to deny the gratuity of grace would be to credit
nature with the ability to perform salutary acts by its
own power, or at least to merit grace by the performance
of naturally good deeds. In the first hypothesis grace
would no longer be necessary for salvation; in the second,
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
it would be proportionate to natural goodness, and
therefore no grace at all. Consequently, the gratuity of
grace cannot be consistently denied without at the same
time denying its necessity.<note place='foot'>For a more extensive treatment
of this important point the reader
is referred to Heinrich-Gutberlet,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII,
§ 418, Mainz 1897.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_2_Thesis_II'/>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis II: There is no naturally good work by
which unaided nature could acquire even so much as an
equitable claim to supernatural grace.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This proposition may be technically qualified as
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fidei proxima saltem</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. The Semipelagians held that, though
nature cannot merit grace in strict justice, it can
merit it at least congruously, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> as a matter of
fitness or equity.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>, p.
<ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>.</note> This contention was rejected
by the Second Council of Orange (A. D. 529),
which defined that <q>God works many good things
in man that man does not work, but man works no
good deeds that God does not give him the
strength to do.</q><note place='foot'>Can. 20: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Multa
Deus facit in homine bona, quae non facit
homo; nulla vero facit homo bona,
quae non Deus praestat, ut faciat
homo.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
193.)</note> And again: <q>[God] Himself
inspires us with faith and charity without any preceding [natural]
merits [on our part].</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sed ipse
[Deus] nobis nullis praecedentibus bonis meritis [scil. naturalibus] et fidem et amorem
sui prius inspirat.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 200.)</note> The
phrase <q>without any preceding merits</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>nullis
praecedentibus meritis</foreign>) excludes both the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum de condigno</foreign> and the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum de congruo</foreign>.
</p>

<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>

<p>
a) The Scriptural argument given above for thesis I
also covers this thesis.
</p>

<p>
The Semipelagians quoted Matth. XXV, 15 in support
of their teaching: <q>To one he gave five talents, and to
another two, and to another one, to every one according
to his proper ability.</q><note place='foot'>Matth. XXV, 15:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et uni
dedit quinque talenta, alii autem
duo, alii vero unum, unicuique
secundum propriam virtutem</foreign>
(ἑκάστῳ κατὰ τὴν ἰδίαν δύναμιν).</q></note> But this text is too vague
to serve as an argument in such an important matter.
Not a few exegetes treat it as a kind of rhetorical figure.
Others, following the example of the Fathers, take <q>talents</q>
to mean purely natural gifts, or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratiae gratis
datae</foreign>, while by <q>ability</q>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>virtus</foreign>) they understand the
already existing grace of faith or a certain definite measure
of initial grace.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Maldonatus' commentary
on this text.</note> But even if <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>virtus</foreign>
meant natural faculty or talent, it cannot be identical with <q>merit.</q>
Considering the common teaching of theologians that the
angels were endowed with grace according to the measure
of their natural perfection,<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
p. 326.</note> we may well suppose
that man receives grace likewise according to his natural
constitution (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia sequitur naturam</foreign>)&mdash;a
predisposition or aptitude which God ordained in His infinite wisdom
to be the instrument through which His graces should
operate either for personal sanctification or the good of
others.
</p>

<p>
b) St. Augustine and his disciples, in defending
the orthodox faith against the Semipelagians,
strongly insisted on the gratuity of the grace of
faith, and above all of the initial
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia praeveniens</foreign>.
</p>

<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>

<p>
α) St. Augustine comments on 1 Cor. IV, 7 as follows:
<q>Nothing is so opposed to this feeling as for
any one to glory concerning his own merits in such a
way as if he himself had made them for himself, and
not the grace of God,&mdash;a grace, however, which makes
the good to differ from the wicked, and is not common
to the good and the wicked.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Praedest. Sanct.</hi>, 3, 10, 31:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nihil huic sensui tam contrarium
est quam de suis meritis sic quemquam
gloriari, tamquam ipse sibi
ea fecerit, non Dei gratia, sed gratia
quae bonos discernit a malis,
non quae communis est bonis et
malis.</foreign></q></note> And in another place
he says: <q>For it would not in any sense be the grace of God, were
it not in every sense gratuitous.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Peccato Orig.</hi>, c. 24, n. 28:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non enim gratia Dei erit ullo
modo, nisi gratuita fuerit omni
modo.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
β) Certain of the Greek Fathers have been suspected
of Semipelagian leanings because they appear to assign
the chief rôle in the business of salvation to nature.<note place='foot'>Cyril
of Jerusalem (<hi rend='italic'>Catech.</hi>, I,
17), Athanasius (<hi rend='italic'>C. Gent.</hi>, n. 30),
Basil (<hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi>, 294:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Divinum auxilium
in nostra situm est potestate</foreign></q>),
Gregory of Nazianzus (<hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi>,
31), and especially Chrysostom
(<hi rend='italic'>Hom. in Gen.</hi>, 12; <hi rend='italic'>Hom. in Epist.
ad Rom.</hi>, 2).</note>
A careful study of their writings, however, shows
that these authors had in mind co-operating, not prevenient
grace. The general teaching of the Orientals on
the gratuity of grace is sufficiently indicated by the demand
made at the Council of Lydda (A. D. 415), that
Pelagius be compelled to retract the proposition:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratiam
Dei secundum merita nostra dari.</foreign></q> The Fathers
who have been accused of Semipelagian sympathies
merely wished to emphasize free-will and to incite the
morally indifferent to co-operate heartily with divine
grace.
</p>

<p>
St. Chrysostom, in particular, expressly asserts the
absolute gratuity of grace when he says of faith:
<q>That which is a merit of faith, may not be ascribed
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
to us, for it is a free gift of God,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom.
in Epist. ad Ephes.</hi>, 4.</note> and directly contradicts
Cassian and the Massilians when he declares:
<q>Thou hast it not of thyself, thou hast received it from
God. Hence thou hast received whatever thou hast, not
only this or that, but all thou hast. For it is not thine
own merit, but the grace of God. Although thou allegest the
faith, thou hast received it by vocation.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom.
in 1 Epist. ad Cor.</hi>, 12.
Cfr. Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina
Actuali</hi>, thes. 33.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) The theological argument for our thesis may be
succinctly stated thus: The grace of God is the cause
of our merits, and hence cannot be itself merited. Being
the cause, it cannot be an effect.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St.
Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 114, art. 5:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Donum gratiae considerari potest
dupliciter. Uno modo secundum rationem
gratuiti doni, et sic manifestum
est quod omne meritum repugnat
gratiae, quia ut Rom. XI, 9
Apostolus dicit: <q>Si autem gratia,
iam non ex operibus.</q> Altero
modo potest considerari secundum
naturam ipsius rei, quae donatur, et
sic etiam non potest cadere sub
merito non habentis gratiam, tum
quia excedit proportionem naturae,
tum etiam quia ante gratiam in
statu peccati homo habet impedimentum
promerendi gratiam, scil.
ipsum peccatum. Postquam autem
aliquis iam habet gratiam, non potest
gratia iam habita sub merito
cadere, quia merces est terminus
operis, gratia autem est principium
cuiuslibet boni operis in nobis.</foreign></q>
This is equally true of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum
de condigno</foreign> and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum de
congruo</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis III: Nature cannot merit supernatural grace
even by natural prayer.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This thesis, like the preceding one, may be technically
qualified as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fidei proxima saltem</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. Let us first clearly establish the state
of the question. Our thesis refers to that particular
kind of prayer (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>preces naturae</foreign>) which by its
intrinsic value, so to speak, obliges Almighty God
to grant what the petitioner asks for, as is undoubtedly
the case with supernatural prayer, according
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
to our Saviour's own promise: <q>Ask
and ye shall receive.</q><note place='foot'>John XVI, 24:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Petite et
accipietis.</foreign></q></note> The inefficacy of natural
prayer asserted in our thesis, is not, as in the
case of merit,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
theses <ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_2_Thesis_I'>I</ref> and
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_2_Thesis_II'>II</ref>.</note>
due to any intrinsic impossibility,
but to a positive divine decree to grant supernatural
prayer.
</p>

<p>
The Second Council of Orange defined against
the Semipelagians: <q>If any one says that the
grace of God can be obtained by human [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> natural]
prayer, and that it is not grace itself which
causes us to invoke God, he contradicts the
prophet Isaias and the Apostle who say: I was
found by them that did not seek me; I appeared openly to them
that asked not after me.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si
quis ad invocationem
humanam [i.e. naturalem] gratiam
Dei dicit posse conferri, non autem
ipsam gratiam facere, ut invocetur
a nobis, contradicit Isaiae prophetae
vel Apostolo idem dicenti: Inventus
sum a non quaerentibus me, palam
apparui his, qui me non interrogabant.</foreign></q>
(Can. 3, Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 176.)</note>
</p>

<p>
a) Sacred Scripture teaches that, unless we are
inspired by the Holy Ghost, we cannot pray efficaciously.
It follows that to be efficacious,
prayer must be an effect of prevenient grace.
We should not even know for what or how to
pray, if the Holy Ghost did not inspire us. Cfr.
Rom. VIII, 26: <q>For we know not what we
should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit himself
asketh for us [inspires us to ask] with unspeakable
groanings.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. VIII, 26:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quid oremus,
sicut oportet, nescimus, sed
ipse Spiritus postulat [postulare
facit] pro nobis gemitibus inenarrabilibus.</foreign></q></note> 1 Cor. XII, 3: <q>No
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
man can say: Lord God, but by the Holy
Ghost.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. XII, 3:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nemo potest
dicere Dominus Deus, nisi in Spiritu
sancto.</foreign></q></note> Supernatural union with Christ is an
indispensable condition of all efficacious prayer.
John XV, 7: <q>If you abide in me, and my words
abide in you, you shall ask whatever you will, and
it shall be done unto you.</q><note place='foot'>John XV, 7:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si manseritis
in me et verba mea in vobis manserint,
quodcunque volueritis, petetis
et fiet vobis.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
b) This is also the teaching of the Fathers.
<q>Who would truly groan, desiring to receive what he prays
for from the Lord,</q> says St. Augustine,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Dono Perseverantiae</hi>, 23, n.
63 sq.: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quis veraciter gemat, desiderans
accipere quod orat a Domino,
si hoc a se ipso sumere existimet,
non ab illo?... Ubi intelligimus
et hoc ipsum esse donum Dei, ut
veraci corde et spiritualiter clamemus
ad Deum. Attendant ergo, quomodo
falluntur, qui putant esse a
nobis, non dari nobis ut petamus,
quaeramus, pulsemus</foreign>, etc.</q></note>
<q>if he thought that he received it from
himself, and not from God? ... We understand
that this is also itself the gift of God, that with a
true heart and spiritually we cry to God. Let
them, therefore, observe how they are mistaken
who think that our seeking, asking, knocking is
of ourselves, and is not given to us; and say that
this is the case because grace is preceded by our
merits; that it follows them when we ask and receive,
and seek and find, and it is opened to us
when we knock.</q><note place='foot'>Cfr. Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina
Actuali</hi>, thes. 32.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) From the theological point of view the inefficacy
of purely natural prayer in matters pertaining
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
to salvation can be demonstrated thus:
Revelation tells us that the work of salvation requires
for its beginning an initial supernatural
grace. Now prayer, that is to say, efficacious
prayer, is in itself a salutary act. Consequently,
there can be no efficacious prayer without prevenient
grace, and purely natural prayer is inefficacious
for salvation.
</p>

<p>
Ripalda holds that, in an economy different from the
present, natural prayer would have a claim to be heard.
This opinion can be defended without prejudice to the
dogma of the gratuity of grace. No doubt God might
condescend to hear such petitions if He would, though,
of course, He is not bound to do so by any intrinsic
power inherent in natural prayer. Unlike merit, prayer
appeals to the mercy of God, not to His justice. Ripalda's
theory, however, rests upon an unprovable assumption,
namely, that man in the state of pure nature
would be able to know of the existence, or at least the
possibility, of a supernatural order and to strive for the
beatific vision as his final end.<note place='foot'>On this difficult question consult
Ruiz, <hi rend='italic'>De Provid.</hi>, disp. 18,
sect. 3. and De Lugo, <hi rend='italic'>De Fide</hi>, disp.
12, sec. 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis IV: Man cannot move God to the bestowal
of supernatural grace by any positive disposition or
preparation on his part.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This thesis may be qualified as
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>propositio certa</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. Positive preparation or disposition for
grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>capacitas
sive praeparatio positiva</foreign>) is practically
on a level with natural prayer. The positive
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
disposition for a natural good sometimes includes
a certain demand to satisfaction, as <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>
thirst demands to be quenched. This is still more
the case when the disposition has been acquired by
a positive preparation for the good in question.
Thus a student, by conscientiously preparing himself
for examination, acquires a claim to be admitted
to it sooner or later. Can this also
be said of grace? Does there exist in man a
positive disposition for grace in the sense that
the withholding of it would grievously injure and
disappoint the soul? Can man, without supernatural
aid, positively dispose himself for the reception
of supernatural grace, confident that God
will reward his efforts by bestowing it on him?
Both these questions must be answered in the negative.
</p>

<p>
a) If there were something in the natural make-up of
man which would move the Almighty to give him grace,
the bestowal of grace would no longer be a free act of
God. But to assert the consequent would be Semipelagian,
hence the antecedent must be false.
</p>

<p>
b) This truth can easily be deduced from the teaching
of the Fathers in the Semipelagian controversy.
They declare, in perfect conformity with St. Paul, that
grace is bestowed gratuitously because God can give or
withhold it as He pleases. St. Augustine says<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Praedest. Sanct.</hi>, c. 12.</note> that the
grace of Baptism is granted freely, that is, without regard
to any positive disposition on the part of the baptized
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
infant. It should be remembered, moreover, that
nature never existed in its pure form, and is now tainted
by original sin.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God the Author of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 226 sqq.</note> Surely a nature tainted by sin cannot
possibly possess the power of meriting divine grace.
</p>

<p>
c) The contention of the so-called Augustinians, that
pure nature needs actual grace to save itself, and consequently
has a claim to such grace at least <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex decentia
Creatoris</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex
lege iustissimae providentiae</foreign>, perilously
resembles Baius' condemned proposition that the state of
pure nature is impossible.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi>,
pp. 228 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis V: Man may prepare himself negatively for
the reception of supernatural grace by not putting any
obstacles in its way.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This proposition is held by a majority of Catholic
theologians (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sententia communior</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
Proof. The solution of this question is intimately
connected with the famous Scholastic
axiom: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Facienti quod est in se Deus non denegat
gratiam</foreign>,</q> that is, to the man who does what
he can, God does not refuse grace. This axiom
is susceptible of three different interpretations.
</p>

<p>
a) It may mean: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Facienti quod est in se cum
auxilio gratiae Deus confert ulteriorem gratiam</foreign>,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, to him who does what he can with the help of
supernatural grace, God grants further and more
powerful graces up to justification. This is
merely another way of stating the indisputable
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
truth that, by faithfully coöperating with the
grace of God, man is able to merit additional
graces, and it holds true even of infidels and
sinners. The first freely performed salutary
act establishes a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum de congruo</foreign> towards
other acts disposing a man for justification. And
since the first as well as all subsequent salutary
acts, in this hypothesis, are pure graces, this interpretation
of our axiom is entirely compatible
with the dogma of the gratuity of grace.<note place='foot'>Further information on this
head <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_III'>Part II, Ch. III</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Facienti quod est in se ex viribus naturalibus
Deus non denegat gratiam</foreign> (to him who
does what he can with his natural moral
strength, God does not refuse grace.) This does
not mean that, in consequence of the efforts of
the natural will, God may not withhold from
anyone the first grace of vocation. In this sense
the axiom would be Semipelagian, and has been
rejected by a majority of the Schoolmen. It is
said of Molina that he tried to render it acceptable
by the hypothesis that God bound Himself by a
contract with Christ to give His grace to all men
who would make good use of their natural faculties.
But how could the existence of this imaginary
contract be proved? In matter of fact Molina
taught, with a large number of other divines,<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelect. Dogmat.</hi>,
Vol. V, 3rd ed., pp. 117 sqq.</note>
that God in the bestowal of His graces freely
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
bound Himself to a definite rule, which coincides
with His universal will to save all mankind.
In the application of this law He pays no regard
to any positive disposition or preparation,
but merely to the presence or absence of obstacles
which would prove impediments to grace. In
other words, God, generally speaking, is more inclined
to offer His grace to one who puts no
obstacles in its way than to one who wallows in
sin and neglects to do his share.<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>À
titre de curiosité</foreign> we may
note the opinion of Ripalda (<hi rend='italic'>De
Ente Supernat.</hi>, disp. 17, sect. 1)
and Vasquez (<hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S.
Theol.</hi>, 1a, disp. 91, c. 10) that
some pre-Tridentine theologians ascribed
to nature the ability of
positively disposing itself for actual
graces and thereby, though in
perfect good faith, entertained
Semipelagian views. Even St.
Thomas has been accused of conceding
too much to Semipelagianism
in two of his earlier works
(<hi rend='italic'>Comment. in Quatuor Libros Sent.</hi>,
II, dist. 28, qu. 1, art. 4, and <hi rend='italic'>De
Veritate</hi>, qu. 14, art. 11), though
his teaching in the <hi rend='italic'>Summa</hi> is admittedly
orthodox. On the extremely
doubtful character of such a summary
indictment see Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>, thes. 34;
Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 495
sqq., 542 sqq.; Glossner, <hi rend='italic'>Die Lehre
des hl. Thomas von der Gnade</hi>,
Mainz 1871.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Facienti quod est in se ex viribus naturae
negative se disponendo [i.e. obicem non ponendo]
Deus non denegat gratiam</foreign> (to the man
who does what he can with his natural moral
strength, disposing himself negatively [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, by
not placing any obstacle] God does not deny grace.
In this form the axiom is identical with our thesis.
The question arises: Can it be made to square
with the dogma of the absolute gratuity of grace?
Vasquez,<note place='foot'>Vasquez, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S. Theol.</hi>, 1a,
disp. 91, c. 10-11.</note> Glossner,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Dogmatik</hi>,
Vol. II, pp. 191 sq.,
Ratisbon 1874.</note> and some others answer
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
this question in the negative, whereas the great
majority of Catholic theologians hold with
Suarez<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Auxil.</hi>, III, 2, 3.</note>
and Lessius,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Effic.</hi>, c.
10.</note> that there is no contradiction
between the two. Though Lessius did
not succeed in proving his famous contention that
the axiom <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Facienti quod est in se Deus non denegat
gratiam</foreign>, was for three full centuries understood
in this sense by the schools,<note place='foot'>Disproved historically by
Palmieri.</note> there is no
doubt that many authorities can be cited in favor
of his interpretation.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pesch,
<hi rend='italic'>Praelect. Dogmat.</hi>,
Vol. V, 3rd ed., pp. 119 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
The theological argument for our thesis may
be formulated thus: The gratuity of grace does
not imply that the recipient must have no sort of
disposition. It merely means that man is positively
unworthy of divine favor. Otherwise the
Church could not teach, as she does, that the
grace bestowed on the angels and on our first
parents in Paradise was absolutely gratuitous,
nor could she hold that the Hypostatic Union of
the two natures in Christ, which is the pattern
and exemplar of all true grace,<note place='foot'>Cfr.
St. Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De Praedest.
Sanct.</hi>, c. 15.</note> was a pure grace
in respect of the humanity of our Lord. The
dogma of the gratuity of grace is in no danger
whatever so long as the relation between
negative disposition and supernatural grace is
conceived as actual (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>facienti=qui facit</foreign>),
not causal
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>facienti=quia facit</foreign>). The motive for the
distribution of grace is to be sought not in the
dignity of human nature, but in God's will to save
all men. We must, however, guard against the
erroneous notion that grace is bestowed according
to a fixed law or an infallible norm regulating
the amount of grace in accordance with the condition
of the recipient. Sometimes great sinners
are miraculously converted, while others of
fairly good antecedents perish. Yet, again, who
could say that to the omniscient and all-wise God
the great sinner did not appear better fitted to
receive grace than the <q>decent</q> but self-sufficient
pharisee?
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Readings</hi>:&mdash;Hurter, <hi rend='italic'>Compendium
Theologiae Dogmaticae</hi>, Vol. III, thes. 187.&mdash;Oswald, <hi rend='italic'>Lehre
von der Heiligung</hi>, § 8, Paderborn 1885.&mdash;*Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>, c. 3, Gulpen
1885.&mdash;Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII,
§ 417-420, Mainz 1897.&mdash;Chr. Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelectiones Dogmaticae</hi>,
Vol. V, 3rd ed., pp. 105 sqq., Freiburg 1908.&mdash;Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Divina</hi>, pp. 468 sqq., Freiburg 1901.
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section 3. The Universality Of Actual Grace</head>

<p>
The gratuity of grace does not conflict with
its universality. Though God distributes His
graces freely, He grants them to all men without
exception, because He wills all to be saved.
</p>

<p>
This divine <q>will to save</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas Dei
salvifica</foreign>) may be regarded in relation either to the wayfaring state
or to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>status termini</foreign>. Regarded
from the first-mentioned point of view it is a merciful will
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas misericordiae</foreign>)
and is generally called first or antecedent will
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas prima s. antecedens</foreign>) or
God's salvific will
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas Dei salvifica</foreign>)
in the strict sense of the word. Considered in relation to the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>status termini</foreign>, it is a just
will, as God rewards or punishes each creature according
to its deserts. This second or consequent will (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas
secunda s. consequens</foreign>) is called <q>predestination</q> in so
far as it rewards the just, and <q>reprobation</q> in so far as
it punishes the wicked.
</p>

<p>
God's <q>will to save</q> may therefore be defined as an
earnest and sincere desire to justify all men and make
them supernaturally happy. As
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas antecedens</foreign> it is
conditional, depending on the free co-operation of man;
as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas
consequens</foreign>, on the other hand, it is absolute,
because God owes it to His justice to reward or punish
every man according to his deserts.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St.
Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>Tract. in
Ioa.</hi>, 36, n. 4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Venit Christus,
sed primo salvare, postea iudicare,
eos iudicando in poenam, qui salvari
noluerunt, eos perducendo ad vitam,
qui credendo salutem non respuerunt.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>

<p>
Hence we shall treat in four distinct articles,
(1) Of the universality of God's will to save;
(2) Of the divine <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas
salvifica</foreign> as the will to
give sufficient graces to all adult human beings
without exception; (3) Of predestination, and
(4) Of reprobation.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_1'/>
<head>Article 1. The Universality Of God's Will To Save</head>

<p>
Although God's will to save all men is practically identical
with His will to redeem all,<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>Soteriology</hi>,
pp. 75 sqq., St. Louis 1914.</note> a formal distinction
must be drawn between the two, (a) because there is
a difference in the Scriptural proofs by which either is
supported, and (b) because the latter involves the fate of
the fallen angels, while the former suggests a question
peculiar to itself, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> the fate of unbaptized children.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis I: God sincerely wills the salvation, not only
of the predestined, but of all the faithful without exception.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This proposition embodies an article of faith.
</p>

<p>
Proof. Its chief opponents are the Calvinists
and the Jansenists, who heretically maintain that
God wills to save none but the predestined.
Against Calvin the Tridentine Council defined:
<q>If any one saith that the grace of justification
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
is attained only by those who are predestined
unto life, but that all others who are called, are
called indeed, but receive not grace, as being, by
the divine power, predestined unto evil; let him
be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI,
can. 17: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
iustificationis gratiam nonnisi praedestinatis
ad vitam contingere dixerit,
reliquos vero omnes qui vocantur,
vocari quidem, sed gratiam non
accipere, utpote divinâ potestate
praedestinatos ad malum, anathema
sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 827.)</note>
</p>

<p>
The teaching of Jansenius that Christ died exclusively
for the predestined,<note place='foot'>Prop. 5,
<hi rend='italic'>apud</hi> Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1096. Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>Soteriology</hi>, p. 76.</note> was censured as
<q>heretical</q> by Pope Innocent X. Hence it
is of faith that Christ died for others besides the
predestined. Who are these <q>others</q>? As the
Church obliges all her children to pray: <q>[Christ]
descended from heaven for us men and for our
salvation,</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Qui
propter nos homines et
propter nostram salutem descendit de
coelis.</foreign></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Credo</hi>).</note>
it is certain that at least all the faithful
are included in the saving will of God. We
say, <q>at least all the faithful,</q> because in matter
of fact the divine <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas
salvifica</foreign> extends to all
the descendants of Adam, as we shall show
further on.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. infra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_1_Thesis_II'>Thesis II</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
a) Holy Scripture positively declares in a
number of passages that God wills the salvation
of all believers, whether predestined or not.
Jesus Himself says in regard to the Jews:
Matth. XXIII, 37: <q>Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou
that killest the prophets, and stonest them that
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
are sent unto thee, how often would I (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>volui</foreign>)
have gathered together thy children, as the hen
doth gather her chickens under her wings, and
thou wouldst not (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>noluisti</foreign>).</q> Two facts are
stated in this text: (1) Our Lord's earnest desire
to save the Jewish people, anciently through the
instrumentality of the prophets, and now in His
own person; (2) the refusal of the Jews to be
saved. Of those who believe in Christ under the
New Covenant we read in the Gospel of St. John
(III, 16): <q>God so loved the world, as to give
his only begotten Son; that whosoever believeth
in him<note place='foot'>πᾶς ὁ πιστεύων εἰς αὐτόν.</note>
may not perish, but may have life everlasting.</q>
However, since many who believe in
Christ do actually perish,<note place='foot'>Among them
was one of our Lord's own chosen Apostles.</note>
the divine <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas
salvifica</foreign>, in principle, extends not only to the predestined,
but to all the faithful, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> to all who
have received the sacrament of Baptism.
</p>

<p>
b) The teaching of the Fathers can be
gathered from the quotations given under Thesis
II, <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>.
</p>

<p>
c) The theological argument may be briefly summarized
as follows: God's will to save is co-extensive with
the grace of adoptive sonship
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>filiatio adoptiva</foreign>), which
is imparted either by Baptism or by perfect charity.
Now, some who were once in the state of grace are
eternally lost. Consequently, God also wills the salvation
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
of those among the faithful who do not actually attain
to salvation and who are, therefore, not predestined.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_1_Thesis_II'/>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis II: God wills to save every human being.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This proposition is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fidei proxima saltem</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. The existence of original sin is no
reason why God should exclude some men from
the benefits of the atonement, as was alleged by
the Calvinistic <q>Infralapsarians.</q> Our thesis is
so solidly grounded on Scripture and Tradition
that some theologians unhesitatingly call it an article
of faith.
</p>

<p>
a) We shall confine the Scriptural demonstration
to two classical passages, Wisd. XI, 24 sq.
and 1 Tim. II, 1 sqq.
</p>

<p>
α) The Book of Wisdom, after extolling God's
omnipotence, says of His mercy: <q>But thou hast
mercy upon all, because thou canst do all things,
and overlookest the sins of men for the sake of
repentance. For thou lovest all things that are,
and hatest none of the things which thou hast
made.... Thou sparest all, because they are
thine, O Lord, who lovest souls.</q><note place='foot'>Wisd.
XI, 24 sqq.: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sed misereris
omnium, quia omnia potes, et
dissimulas peccata hominum propter
poenitentiam. Diligis enim omnia
quae sunt et nihil odisti eorum quae
fecisti.... Parcis autem omnibus,
quoniam tua sunt, Domine, qui
amas animas.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
In this text the mercy of God is described as universal.
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Misereris omnium,
parcis omnibus</foreign>. This universality
is based (1) on His omnipotence (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quia
omnia potes</foreign>),
which is unlimited. His mercy, being equally boundless,
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
must therefore include all men without exception.
The universality of God's mercy is based (2) on His
universal over-lordship and dominion (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quoniam tua sunt;
diligis omnia quae fecisti</foreign>). As there is no creature that
does not belong to God, so there is no man whom He
does not love and to whom He does not show mercy.
The universality of God's mercy in the passage quoted is
based (3) on His love for souls
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>qui amas animas</foreign>).
Wherever there is an immortal soul (be it in child or
adult, Christian, pagan or Jew), God is at work to save it.
Consequently the divine
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas salvifica</foreign> is universal, not
only in a moral, but in the physical sense of the term,
that is, it embraces all the descendants of Adam.
</p>

<p>
β) 1 Tim. II, 2 sqq.: <q>I desire therefore, first of all,
that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings
be made for all men.... For this is good and acceptable
in the sight of God our Saviour, who will have
all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of
the truth. For there is one God, and one mediator of
God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a
redemption for all.</q><note place='foot'>1 Tim. II,
1 sqq.: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Obsecro
igitur primum omnium fieri obsecrationes,
orationes, postulationes,
gratiarum actiones pro omnibus
hominibus</foreign>
(ὑπερ πάντων ἀνθρώπων)....
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hoc enim bonum est et acceptum
coram Salvatore nostro Deo,
qui omnes homines vult salvos fieri</foreign>
(ὁς πάντας ἀνθρώπους θέλει σωθῆναι)
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>et ad agnitionem veritatis
venire: unus enim Deus</foreign> (εἴς γὰρ Θεός),
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>unus et mediator</foreign> (εἴς καὶ
μεσίτης) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dei et hominum homo
Christus Iesus, qui dedit redemptionem
semetipsum pro omnibus</foreign>
(ὑπὲρ πάντων).</q></note>
</p>

<p>
The Apostle commands us to pray <q>for all men,</q> because
this practice is <q>good and acceptable in the sight of
God.</q> Why is it good and acceptable? Because God
<q>will have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge
of the truth.</q> In other words, God's will to save
is universal.
</p>

<p>
The question arises: Is the universality of the divine
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas
salvifica</foreign>, as inculcated by St. Paul, merely moral,
or is it physical, admitting of no exceptions? The
answer may be found in the threefold reason given
by the Apostle: the oneness of God, the mediatorship
of Christ, and the universality of the Redemption. (1) <q>For
there is [but] one God.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unus
enim Deus.</foreign></q> Cfr. Rom.
III, 29 sq., X, 12.</note> As truly, therefore,
as God is the God of all men without exception,
is each and every man included in the divine <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas
salvifica</foreign>. (2) <q>There is [but] ... one mediator
of God and men, the man Christ Jesus.</q> The human
nature which Christ assumed in the Incarnation is common
to all men. Hence, whoever is a man, has Jesus
Christ for his mediator.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>Soteriology</hi>,
pp. 77 sqq.</note> (3) Christ <q>gave himself a
redemption [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> died] for all.</q> That is to say, God's
will to save is co-extensive with His will to redeem. The
latter is universal,<note place='foot'>Cfr. Matth. XVIII, 11; 2 Cor.
V, 15. That God's will to redeem
mankind is universal has been
proved in <hi rend='italic'>Soteriology</hi>, pp. 77 sqq.</note>
consequently also the former.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
on this text Estius, <hi rend='italic'>Comment.
in Epist. S. Pauli, h. l.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
b) The Fathers and early ecclesiastical writers
were wont to base their teaching in this matter
on the above-quoted texts, and clearly intimated
that they regarded the truth therein set forth as
divinely revealed. Passaglia<note place='foot'>In his
work <hi rend='italic'>De Partitione Voluntatis
Divinae in Primam et Secundam</hi>,
Rome 1851.</note> has worked out
the Patristic argument in detail, quoting no less
than two hundred authorities.
</p>

<p>
α) We must limit ourselves to a few specimen citations.
St. Ambrose declares that God wills to save
all men. <q>He willed all to be His own whom He
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
established and created. O man, do not flee and hide
thyself! He wants even those who flee, and does not will that
those in hiding should perish.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Ps.</hi>,
39, n. 20: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ille
omnes suos vult esse, quos condidit
et creavit. Utinam tu homo non fugias
et te abscondas! Ille etiam
fugientes requirit et absconditos non
vult perire.</foreign></q></note> St.
Gregory of Nazianzus holds God's
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas salvifica</foreign> to
be co-extensive in scope with original sin and the atonement.
<q>The law, the prophets, and the sufferings of
Christ,</q> he says, <q>by which we were redeemed, are common
property and admit of no exception: but as all [men]
are participators in the same Adam, deceived by the serpent
and subject to death in consequence of sin, so by the
heavenly Adam all are restored to salvation and by the
wood of ignominy recalled to the wood of life, from
which we had fallen.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi>,
33, n. 9.</note> St. Prosper concludes that,
since all men are in duty bound to pray for their fellowmen,
God must needs be willing to save all without exception.
<q>We must sincerely believe,</q> he says, <q>that God
wills all men to be saved, since the Apostle solicitously prescribes supplication
to be made for all.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Resp. ad
Capitula Gallor.</hi>, c. 2:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sincerissime credendum est, Deum
velle ut omnes homines salvi fiant,
siquidem Apostolus sollicite praecipit,
ut Deo pro omnibus supplicetur.</foreign></q></note> The
question why so many perish, Prosper answers as
follows: <q>[God] wills all to be saved and to come to
the knowledge of truth, ... so that those who are saved,
are saved because He wills them to be saved, while those who perish,
perish because they deserve to perish.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op.
cit.</hi>, c. 8: <q>... <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>qui et
omnes vult salvos fieri et ad agnitionem
veritatis venire, ... ut et
qui salvantur ideo salvi sint, quia
illos voluit Deus salvos fieri, et qui
pereunt, ideo pereant, quia perire
meruerunt.</foreign></q></note>
In his <hi rend='italic'>Responsiones ad Capitula Obiectionum Vincentianarum</hi>
the same writer energetically defends St.
Augustine against the accusation that his teaching on
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
predestination is incompatible with the orthodox doctrine
of the universality of God's saving will.<note place='foot'>For
further information on this
subject consult Ruiz, <hi rend='italic'>De Voluntate
Dei</hi>, disp. 19 sqq.; Petavius, <hi rend='italic'>De Deo</hi>,
X, 4 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) St. Augustine aroused suspicion in the camp of
the Semipelagians by his general teaching on predestination
and more particularly by his interpretation of
1 Tim. II, 4. The great Bishop of Hippo interprets this
Pauline text in no less than four different ways. In
his treatise <hi rend='italic'>De Spiritu et Litera</hi> he describes the divine
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas salvifica</foreign>
as strictly universal in the physical sense.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Spiritu et Litera</hi>, c. 33,
n. 58: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vult Deus omnes homines
salvos fieri et ad agnitionem veritatis
venire; non sic tamen ut iis adimat
liberum arbitrium, quo vel bene vel male utentes iustissime
iudicentur.</foreign></q></note> In his <hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>
he restricts it to the predestined.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>,
c. 103.</note> In his <hi rend='italic'>Contra Iulianum</hi> he says: <q>No one
is saved unless God so wills.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra
Iulian.</hi>, IV, 8, 42: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nemo
salvatur nisi volente Deo.</foreign></q></note>
In his work <hi rend='italic'>De Correptione
et Gratia</hi>: <q>God wills all men to be saved, because
He makes us to will this, just as He sent the spirit
of His Son [into our hearts], crying: Abba, Father, that
is, making us to cry, Abba, Father.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Corrept. et Gratia</hi>, c. 15, n.
47: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnes homines vult Deus
salvos fieri, quoniam nos facit velle,
sicut misit Spiritum Filii sui clamantem:
Abba, pater, i.e. nos clamare
facientem.</foreign></q></note> How did St.
Augustine come to interpret this simple text in so many
different ways? Some think he chose this method to
overwhelm the Pelagians and Semipelagians with Scriptural
proofs. But this polemical motive can hardly have
induced him to becloud an obvious text and invent interpretations
which never occurred to any other ecclesiastical
writer before or after his time. The conundrum can
only be solved by the assumption that Augustine believed
in a plurality of literal senses in the Bible and held that
over and above (or notwithstanding) the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sensus obvius</foreign>
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
every exegete is free to read as much truth into any given
passage as possible, and that such interpretation lay within
the scope of the inspiration of the Holy Ghost quite
as much as the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sensus obvius</foreign>. In his
<hi rend='italic'>Confessions</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Confessiones</hi>,
XII, 17 sqq.</note> he
actually argues in favor of a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pluralitas sensuum</foreign>. He
was keen enough to perceive, however, that if a Scriptural
text is interpreted in different ways, the several constructions
put upon it must not be contradictory. As he
was undoubtedly aware of the distinction between
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas antecedens</foreign>
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>consequens</foreign>,<note place='foot'>Faure
has proved this in his
<hi rend='italic'>Notae in Enchiridion S. Augustini</hi>,
c. 103, Naples 1847, pp. 195 sqq.</note> his different interpretations
of 1 Tim. II, 4 can be reconciled by assuming
that he conceived God's <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas salvifica</foreign> as
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>antecedens</foreign>
in so far as it is universal, and as
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>consequens</foreign>
in so far as it is particular. St. Thomas solves the difficulty
in a similar manner: <q>The words of the Apostle,
<q>God will have all men to be saved, etc.,</q> can be understood
in three ways: First, by a restricted application,
in which case they would mean, as Augustine says,
<q>God wills all men to be saved that are saved, not because
there is no man whom he does not wish to be
saved, but because there is no man saved whose salvation
He does not will.</q> Secondly, they can be understood as
applying to every class of individuals, not of every individual
of each class; in which case they mean that <q>God
wills some men of every class and condition to be saved,
males and females, Jews and Gentiles, great and small, but
not all of every condition.</q> Thirdly, according to the
Damascene, they are understood of the antecedent will of
God, not of the consequent will. The distinction must
not be taken as applying to the divine will itself, in which
there is nothing antecedent or consequent; but to the
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
things willed. To understand which we must consider
that everything, so far as it is good, is willed by God.
A thing taken in its strict sense, and considered absolutely,
may be good or evil, and yet when some additional circumstance
is taken into account, by a consequent consideration
may be changed into its contrary. Thus, that
men should live is good; and that men should be killed
is evil, absolutely considered. If in a particular case it
happens that a man is a murderer or dangerous to society,
to kill him becomes good, to let him live an evil. Hence
it may be said of a just judge that antecedently he wills
all men to live, but consequently he wills the murderer to
be hanged. In the same way God antecedently wills all
men to be saved, but consequently wills some to be
damned, as His justice exacts. Nor do we will simply
what we will antecedently, but rather we will it in a
qualified manner; for the will is directed to things as they
are in themselves, and in themselves they exist under
particular qualifications. Hence we will a thing simply
in as much as we will it when all particular circumstances
are considered; and this is what is meant by willing consequently.
Thus it may be said that a just judge wills
simply the hanging of a murderer, but in a qualified manner
he would will him to live, inasmuch as he is a man.
Such a qualified will may be called a willingness rather
than an absolute will. Thus it is clear that whatever
God simply wills takes place; although what He wills
antecedently may not take place.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a, qu. 19, art.
6, ad 1. On Augustine's teaching
see Franzelin, <hi rend='italic'>De Deo Uno</hi>, thes.
51 sq., and, less favorably, Bardenhewer-Shahan,
<hi rend='italic'>Patrology</hi>, pp. 498
sqq., Freiburg 1908.</note>
</p>

<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis III: The lot of unbaptized infants, though
difficult to reconcile with the universality of God's saving
will, furnishes no argument against it.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Proof. The most difficult problem concerning
the divine <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas salvifica</foreign>&mdash;a real
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>crux theologorum</foreign>&mdash;is
the fate of unbaptized children. The
Church has never uttered a dogmatic definition
on this head, and theologians hold widely divergent
opinions.
</p>

<p>
Bellarmine teaches that infants who die without
being baptized, are excluded from the divine
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas salvifica</foreign>,
because, while the non-reception
of Baptism is the proximate reason of their
damnation, its ultimate reason must be the will
of God.
</p>

<p>
a) This rather incautious assertion needs to be
carefully restricted. It is an article of faith that
God has instituted the sacrament of Baptism as
the ordinary means of salvation for all men. On
the other hand, it is certain that He expects
parents, priests, and relatives, as his representatives,
to provide conscientiously for its proper and
timely administration. Sinful negligence on the
part of these responsible agents cannot, therefore,
be charged to Divine Providence, but must be laid
at the door of those human agents who fail to do
their duty. In exceptional cases infants can be
saved even by means of the so-called Baptism of
blood (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>baptismus sanguinis</foreign>),
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> death for
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
Christ's sake. On the whole it may be said that
God has, in principle, provided for the salvation of
little children by the institution of infant Baptism.
</p>

<p>
b) But there are many cases in which either invincible
ignorance or the order of nature precludes the administration
of Baptism. The well-meant opinion of
some theologians<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>
Arrubal (<hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S.
Theol.</hi>, 1a, disp. 91, c. 3 sq.) and
Kilber (<hi rend='italic'>Theol. Wirceburg., De Deo</hi>,
disp. 4, c. 2, art. 3).</note> that the responsibility in all such cases
lies not with God, but with men, lacks probability. Does
God, then, really will the damnation of these innocents?
Some modern writers hold that the physical order of
nature is responsible for the misfortune of so many
innocent infants; but this hypothesis contributes nothing
towards clearing up the awful mystery.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Albertus a Bulsano, <hi rend='italic'>Theol.
Dogmat.</hi>, ed. Graun, Vol. II, p. 141,
Innsbruck 1894.</note> For God is
the author of the natural as well as of the supernatural
order. To say that He is obliged to remove existing
obstacles by means of a miracle would disparage His
ordinary providence.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia et
Libero Arbitrio</hi>, II, 12: <q>... <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>haec
responsio non videtur digna Chritianis,
qui providentiam Dei erga
homines ex sacris literis et ecclesiastica
traditione didicerunt. Nam
si non cadit passer in terram sine
Patre nostro, qui in coelis est, quanto
magis nos apud Deum pluris sumus
illis?</foreign></q></note> Klee's assumption that dying
children become conscious long enough to enable them
to receive the Baptism of desire
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>baptismus flaminis</foreign>),
is scarcely compatible with the definition of the Council
of Florence that <q>the souls of those who die in actual
mortal sin, or only in original sin, forthwith descend to
hell.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Definimus illorum animas,
qui in actuali mortali peccato vel solo
originali decedunt, mox in infernum
descendere.</foreign></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Decret. Unionis</hi>,
quoted by Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 693.)</note> A still more unsatisfactory supposition is that
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
the prayer of Christian parents acts like a baptism of desire
and saves their children from hell. This theory, espoused
by Cardinal Cajetan, was rejected by the Fathers
of Trent,<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pallavicini, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Conc.
Trid.</hi>, IX, 8.</note> and Pope Pius V ordered it to be expunged
from the Roman edition of Cajetan's works.<note place='foot'>It occurs in his commentary
on the <hi rend='italic'>Summa</hi>, 3a, qu. 68, art. 2, 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
A way out of the difficulty is suggested by Gutberlet and
others, who, holding with St. Thomas that infants that
die without Baptism will enjoy a kind of natural beatitude,
think it possible that God, in view of their sufferings,
may mercifully cleanse them from original sin and
thereby place them in a state of innocence.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische
Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII, p.
295, Mainz 1897.</note> This theory
is based on the assumption that the ultimate fate
of unbaptized children is deprivation of the beatific
vision of God and therefore a state of real damnation
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>poena damni, infernum</foreign>),
and that the remission of original
sin has for its object merely to enable these unfortunate
infants to enjoy a perfect natural beatitude,
which they could not otherwise attain. It is reasonable
to argue that, as these infants are deprived of celestial
happiness through no guilt of their own, the Creator can
hardly deny them some sort of natural beatitude, to
which their very nature seems to entitle them. <q>Hell</q>
for them probably consists in being deprived of the beatific
vision of God, which is a supernatural grace and as such
lies outside the sphere of those prerogatives to which human
nature has a claim by the fact of creation. This
theory would seem to establish at least some manner of
salvation for the infants in question, and consequently,
to vindicate the divine <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas salvifica</foreign>
in the same measure. Needless to say, it can claim no more than probability,
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
and we find ourselves constrained to admit, at the
conclusion of our survey, that there is no sure and perfect
solution of the difficulty, and theologians therefore
do well to confess their ignorance.<note place='foot'>On the probable fate of unbaptized
infants cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God
the Author of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 300 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) The difficulty of which we have spoken does
not, of course, in any way impair the certainty
of the dogma. The Scriptural passages cited
above<note
place='foot'><ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_1_Thesis_II'>Thesis
II</ref>.</note> clearly prove that God wills to save
all men without exception. In basing the universality
of God's mercy on His omnipotence, His
universal dominion, and His love of souls, the
Book of Wisdom<note place='foot'>Quoted <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, p.
<ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>.</note> evidently implies that the unbaptized
infants participate in that mercy in all
three of these respects. How indeed could Divine
Omnipotence exert itself more effectively
than by conferring grace on those who are inevitably
and without any fault of their own deprived
of Baptism? Who would deny that little
children, as creatures, are subject to God's universal
dominion in precisely the same manner as
adults? Again, if God loves the souls of men,
must He not also love the souls of infants?
</p>

<p>
1 Tim. II, 4<note place='foot'>Quoted <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, p.
<ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>.</note> applies primarily to adults,
because strictly speaking only adults can <q>come
to the knowledge of the truth.</q> But St. Paul
employs certain middle terms which undoubtedly
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
comprise children as well. Thus, if all men have
but <q>one God,</q> this God must be the God of infants
no less than of adults, and His mercy and
goodness must include them also. And if Jesus
Christ as God-man is the <q>one mediator of God
and men,</q> He must also have assumed the human
nature of children, in order to redeem them from
original sin. Again, if Christ <q>gave himself a
redemption for all,</q> it is impossible to assume that
millions of infants should be directly excluded
from the benefits of the atonement.<note place='foot'>On the whole question consult
Franzelin, <hi rend='italic'>De Deo Uno</hi>, thes. 53,
3rd ed., Rome 1883.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_2'/>
<head>Article 2. God's Will To Give Sufficient Grace To All Adult
Human Beings In Particular</head>

<p>
In relation to adults, God manifests His saving will
by the bestowal of sufficient grace upon all.<note place='foot'>On
the notion and existence of
sufficient grace see <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_I_Section_2_No_6'>Ch. I,
Sect. 2, No. 6</ref>.</note> The bestowal
of sufficient grace being evidently an effluence of
the universal
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas salvifica</foreign>, the granting of such grace
to all who have attained the use of reason furnishes another
proof for the universality of grace.
</p>

<p>
God gives all men sufficient graces. But He is not
obliged to give to each <emph>efficacious</emph> graces, because all that
is required to enable man to reach his supernatural destiny
is coöperation with sufficient grace, especially
with the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
prima vocans</foreign>, which is the beginning of all
salutary operation.
</p>

<p>
To prove that God gives sufficient grace to all adult
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
human beings without exception, we must show that He
gives sufficient grace (1) to the just, (2) to the sinner,
and (3) to the heathen. This we shall do in three distinct
theses.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis I: God gives to all just men sufficient grace
to keep His commandments.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de fide</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. The Tridentine Council teaches: <q>If
any one saith that the commandments of God are,
even for one that is justified and constituted in grace, impossible
to keep; let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI, can.
18: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis dixerit, Dei praecepta
homini etiam iustificato et sub gratia
constituto esse ad observandum impossibilia,
anathema sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 828). Cfr.
Sess. VI, cap. 11 (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 804).</note>
</p>

<p>
A contrary proposition in the writings of Jansenius<note place='foot'><q><foreign
lang='la' rend='italic'>Aliqua Dei praecepta hominibus
iustis volentibus et conantibus
secundum praesentes, quas habent
vires, sunt impossibilia: deest quoque
illis gratia, quâ possibilia fiant.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 1092.)</note>
was censured by Pope Innocent the Tenth
as <q>foolhardy, impious, blasphemous, and heretical.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Church does not assert that God gives to the just
sufficient grace at all times. She merely declares that
sufficient grace is at their disposal whenever they are
called upon to obey the law
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>urgente praecepto</foreign>). Nor
need God always bestow a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia proxime sufficiens</foreign>; in
many instances the grace of prayer (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia remote
sufficiens</foreign>) fully serves the purpose.<note place='foot'>On the
distinction between <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia proxime sufficiens</foreign>
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
remote sufficiens</foreign>, cfr. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, pp.
<ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
This dogma is clearly contained in Holy Scripture.
We shall quote the most important texts.
</p>

<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>

<p>
a) 1 John V, 3 sq.: <q>For this is the charity
of God, that we keep his commandments, and his
commandments are not heavy. For whatsoever
is born of God, overcometh the world.</q><note place='foot'>1 John V, 3 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Haec est
caritas Dei, ut mandata eius custodiamus
et mandata eius gravia non
sunt</foreign> (αἱ ἐντολαὶ αὐτοῦ βαρεῖαι
οὐκ εἰσίν): <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quoniam omne quod
natum est ex Deo [= iustus] vincit
mundum.</foreign></q></note> According
to this text the <q>charity of God</q> manifests
itself in <q>keeping his commandments</q> and
<q>overcoming the world.</q> This is declared to be
an easy task. Our Lord Himself says: <q>My
yoke is sweet and my burden light.</q><note place='foot'>Matth. XI, 30.</note> Hence
it must be possible to keep His commandments,
and therefore God does not withhold the absolutely
necessary graces from the just.
</p>

<p>
St. Paul consoles the Corinthians by telling
them that God will not suffer them to be tempted
beyond their strength, but will help them to a
happy issue, provided they faithfully coöperate
with His grace. 1 Cor. X, 13: <q>God is faithful,
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that
which you are able, but will make also with temptation
issue, that you may be able to bear it.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. X, 13:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fidelis autem
Deus est, qui non patietur vos tentari
supra id quod potestis</foreign> (πειραςθῆναι ὑπέρ ἡ δύνασθε),
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sed faciet
etiam cum tentatione proventum</foreign>
(ἔκβασιν), <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ut possitis sustinere.</foreign></q></note>
As it is impossible even for the just to overcome
grievous temptations without supernatural aid,<note place='foot'>
<hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> sq.</note>
and as God Himself tells us that we are able to
overcome them, it is a necessary inference that He
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
bestows sufficient grace. The context hardly
leaves a doubt that St. Paul has in mind the just,
for a few lines further up he says: <q>Therefore he
that thinketh himself to stand, let him take heed
lest he fall.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. X, 12:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Itaque qui se
existimat stare, videat ne cadat.</foreign></q></note>
But there is no exegetical objection
to applying the text to all the faithful without
exception.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. infra</hi>, Thesis II. Cfr. also
Ecclus. II, 11 sqq.; John VI, 37;
2 Pet I, 10 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) This dogma is clearly set forth in the writings
of the Fathers. Some of them, it is true,
when combating the Pelagians and Semipelagians,
defended the proposition that <q>grace is not given
to all men,</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratiam
non omnibus dari.</foreign></q></note> but
they meant <emph>efficacious</emph> grace.
</p>

<p>
α) A typical representative of this group of ecclesiastical
writers is the anonymous author of the work <hi rend='italic'>De
Vocatione Omnium Gentium</hi>,<note place='foot'>Migne,
<hi rend='italic'>P. L.</hi>, XVII, 1073 sqq.
Cfr. Bardenhewer-Shahan, <hi rend='italic'>Patrology</hi>,
p. 515.</note> whom Pope Gelasius
praised as <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>probatus
Ecclesiae magister</foreign>.</q> This fifth-century
writer, who was highly esteemed by his contemporaries,
discusses the question whether and in what sense
all men are called, and why some are not saved. He
begins by drawing a distinction between God's general and
His special providence.<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Benignitas
Dei generalis&mdash;specialis
Dei misericordia.</foreign></note> <q>It so pleased God,</q> he says,
<q>to give His efficacious grace to many, and to withhold
His sufficient grace from none, in order that it might appear
from both [actions] that what is conferred upon a portion is not
denied to the entire race.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deo
autem placuit et hanc
[gratiam efficacem] multis tribuere
et illam [sufficientem] a nemine
submovere, ut ex utraque appareat,
non negatum universitati, quod collatum
est portioni.</foreign></q> (<hi rend='italic'>De Vocatione
Omnium Gentium</hi>, II, 25.) For
further information on the doctrinal
character of this work see Fr.
Wörter, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Dogmengeschichte des
Semipelagianismus</hi>, Münster 1900.</note>
</p>

<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>

<p>
β) The Jansenists appealed in favor of their teaching
to such Patristic passages as the following: <q>After
the withdrawal of the divine assistance he [St. Peter]
was unable to stand;</q><note place='foot'>Chrysostom,
<hi rend='italic'>Hom. in Matth.</hi>,
82, n. 3.</note> and: <q>He had undertaken more
than he was able to do.</q><note place='foot'>Augustine,
<hi rend='italic'>Serm.</hi>, 296: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Plus
ausus erat, quam eius capacitas sustinebat.</foreign></q></note>
But the two Fathers from
whose writings these passages are taken (SS. Chrysostom
and Augustine) speak, as the context evinces, of
the withdrawal of efficacious and proximately sufficient
grace in punishment of Peter's presumption. Had St.
Peter followed our Lord's advice<note place='foot'>Matth. XXVI, 41: <q>Watch
ye and pray that ye enter not into
temptation.</q></note> and prayed instead
of relying on his own strength, he would not have
fallen. That this was the mind of St. Augustine clearly
appears from the following sentence in his work <hi rend='italic'>De Unitate
Ecclesiae</hi>: <q>Who shall doubt that Judas, had he
willed, would not have betrayed Christ, and that
Peter, had he willed, would not have thrice denied his
Master?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Lib. de Unitate Ecclesiae</hi>, 9:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quis dubitaverit quod Iudas
Christum, si voluisset, non utique
tradidisset, et Petrus, si voluisset, ter
Dominum non negasset?</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
c) The theological argument for our thesis
may be formulated as follows: Since the state
of grace confers a claim to supernatural happiness,
it must also confer a claim to those graces
which are necessary to attain it.
</p>

<p>
To assert that God denies the just sufficient grace
to observe His commandments, to avoid mortal sin, and
to persevere in the state of grace, would be to gainsay
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
His solemn promise to His adopted children: <q>This is
the will of my Father that sent me: that every one who
seeth the Son and believeth in him, may have life everlasting,
and I will raise him up in the last day.</q><note place='foot'>John VI,
40.</note> Consequently,
God owes it to His own fidelity to bestow sufficient
graces upon the just.
</p>

<p>
Again, according to the plain teaching of Revelation,
the just are obliged, under pain of sin, to observe the
commandments of God and the precepts of His
Church.<note place='foot'>Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI,
can. 19-21.</note> But this is impossible without the aid of
grace. Consequently, God grants at least sufficient
grace to his servants, for <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad
impossibile nemo tenetur</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>,
pp. 573 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_2_Thesis_II'/>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis II: In regard to Christians guilty of mortal
sin we must hold: (1) that ordinary sinners always
receive sufficient grace to avoid mortal sin and do
penance; (2) that God never entirely withdraws His
grace even from the obdurate.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The first part of this thesis embodies a theological
conclusion; the second states the common
teaching of Catholic theologians.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Proof of the First Part.</hi> The distinction
here drawn between <q>ordinary</q> and <q>obdurate</q>
sinners has its basis in revelation and is clearly
demanded by the different degrees of certainty
attaching to the two parts of our thesis.
</p>

<p>
An <q>ordinary</q> sinner is a Christian who has lost sanctifying
grace by a grievous sin. An <q>obdurate</q> sinner
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
is one who, by repeatedly and maliciously transgressing
the laws of God, has dulled his intellect and hardened his
will against salutary inspirations. A man may be an
habitual sinner (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>consuetudinarius</foreign>)
and a backslider, without
being obdurate, or, which comes to the same, impenitent.
Weakness is not malice, though sinful habits often
beget impenitence, which is one of the sins against the
Holy Ghost and the most formidable obstacle in the way
of conversion.
</p>

<p>
With regard to ordinary sinners, our thesis
asserts that they always receive sufficient grace
to avoid mortal sin and do penance.
</p>

<p>
a) Experience teaches that a man falls deeper
and deeper if he does not hasten to do penance
after committing a mortal sin. But this is not
the fault of Almighty God, who never withholds
His grace; it is wholly the fault of the sinner who
fails to coöperate with the proffered supernatural
assistance.
</p>

<p>
α) A sufficient Scriptural argument for this
part of our thesis is contained in the texts cited in
support of Thesis I. If it is true that God suffers
no one to be tempted beyond his strength,<note place='foot'>Cfr. 1 Cor. X, 13.</note>
this must surely apply to Christians who have had
the misfortune of committing mortal sin. St.
John says that the commandments of God <q>are
not heavy</q> and that faith is <q>the victory which
overcometh the world.</q><note place='foot'>1 John V, 3 sq.</note> Faith in Christ remains
in the Christian, even though he be guilty
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
of mortal sin, and consequently if he wills, he is
able, by the aid of sufficient grace, to overcome
the <q>world,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the temptations arising from
concupiscence,<note place='foot'>Cfr. 1 John II, 16.</note> and thus to cease committing
mortal sins.
</p>

<p>
β) As for the teaching of Tradition, St. Augustine
lays down two theological principles
which apply to saint and sinner alike.
</p>

<p>
<q>God does not enjoin impossibilities,</q> he says, <q>but in
His injunctions counsels you both to do what you can for yourself, and
to ask His aid in what you cannot do.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Natura et Gratia</hi>, c. 43,
n. 50: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus impossibilia non
iubet, sed iubendo admonet, et facere
quod possis et petere quod non possis.</foreign></q></note>
It follows that the sinner always receives at least the grace
of prayer, which Augustine therefore calls
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia initialis
sive parva</foreign>, and of which he says that its right use ensures
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia magna</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
The second principle is this: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cum lege coniuncta
est gratia, quâ lex observari possit.</foreign></q> That is, every
divine law, by special ordinance, carries with it the grace
by which it may be observed. In other words, the laws
of God can always be obeyed because the lawgiver never
fails to grant sufficient grace to keep them.<note place='foot'>For
an explanation of certain
difficult passages bearing on this
point in the writings of St. Augustine,
see Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>,
pp. 531 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) That the sinner always receives sufficient
grace to be converted, follows from the Scriptural
injunction of conversion. If conversion to
God is a duty, and to comply with this duty is
impossible without the aid of grace,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref> sq.</note> the divine
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
command obviously implies the bestowal of sufficient
grace.
</p>

<p>
That conversion is a duty follows from such Scriptural
texts as these: <q>As I live, saith the Lord God, I desire
not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn
from his way and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your
evil ways!</q><note place='foot'>Ez. XXXIII, 11:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vivo ego,
dicit Dominus Deus, nolo mortem
impii, sed ut convertatur impius a via
sua et vivat. Convertimini, convertimini
a viis vestris pessimis.</foreign></q></note> <q>The Lord delayeth not his promise, as
some imagine, but dealeth patiently for your sake, not
willing that any should perish, but that all should return
to penance.</q><note place='foot'>2 Pet. III, 9:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non tardat
Dominus promissionem suam, sicut
quidam existimant, sed patienter agit</foreign>
(μακροθυμεῖ) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>propter vos, nolens
aliquos perire, sed omnes ad poenitentiam
reverti</foreign> (μὴ βουλόμενός
τινας ἀπολέσθαι, ἀλλὰ πάντας εἰς
μετάνοιαν χωρῆσαι).</q></note>
</p>

<p>
This teaching is faithfully echoed by Tradition.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Proof of the Second Part.</hi> Obduracy is a
serious obstacle to conversion because the obdurate
sinner has confirmed his will in malice<note place='foot'>Cfr. Is. V, 20.</note>
and by systematic resistance diminished the influence
of grace. The question here is whether
or not God in such cases eventually withdraws His
grace altogether.
</p>

<p>
Some rigorists hold that He does so, with the purpose
of sparing the sinner greater tortures in hell.<note place='foot'>According
to Ruiz (<hi rend='italic'>De Praedest.</hi>,
disp. 39, sect. 1), there are
but very few divines (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>valde pauci</foreign>)
who hold this view.</note> Though
this assertion cannot be said to contravene the dogma of
the universality of God's salvific will, (its defenders do
not deny that He faithfully does His share to save these
unfortunate reprobates), we prefer to adopt the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sententia
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
communis</foreign>, that God grants even the most obdurate sinner&mdash;at
least now and then, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> during a mission or on
the occasion of some terrible catastrophe&mdash;sufficient
grace to be converted. The theological reasons for this
opinion, which we hold to be the true one, coincide in
their last analysis with those set forth in the first part
of our thesis.
</p>

<p>
a) Sacred Scripture, in speaking of the duty of
repentance, makes no distinction between ordinary
and obdurate sinners. On the contrary, the Book
of Wisdom points to one of the most wicked
and impenitent of nations, the Canaanites, as a
shining object of divine mercy and patience.<note place='foot'>Wisd. XII, 10.</note>
According to St. Paul, God calls especially upon
hardened and impenitent sinners to do penance.
Rom. II, 4 sq.: <q>Or despisest thou the riches
of his goodness, and patience, and long suffering?
Knowest thou not that the benignity of God leadeth
thee to penance? But according to thy hardness
and impenitent heart, thou treasurest up to
thyself wrath, against the day of wrath, and revelation
of the just judgment of God, who will render
to every man according to his works.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. II, 4 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>An divitias
bonitatis eius et patientiae et longanimitatis
contemnis? Ignoras quoniam
benignitas Dei ad poenitentiam</foreign>
(εἰς μετάνοιαν) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>te adducit? Secundum
autem duritiem</foreign> (σκληρότητα)
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>tuam et impoenitens cor</foreign>
(ἀμετανόητον καρδίαν) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>thesaurizas
tibi iram in die irae et revelationis
iusti iudicii Dei, qui reddet unicuique
secundum opera eius.</foreign></q> Cfr.
Prov. I, 20 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
There are some Scriptural passages which seem to
imply that God withdraws His grace from those who are
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
obdurate, nay, that He Himself hardens their hearts in
punishment of sin. Thus the Lord says of Pharao: <q>I
shall harden his heart,</q><note place='foot'>Ex. VII, 3:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ego indurabo
cor eius.</foreign></q></note> and Moses tells us: <q>The
Lord hardened Pharao's heart, and he harkened not unto
them.</q><note place='foot'>Ex. IX, 12: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Induravitque
Dominus cor Pharaonis, etc.</foreign></q></note> But it would be wrong to assume that
this denotes a positive action on the part of God. Pharao, as
we are told further on, <q>hardened his own heart</q>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ingravavit
cor suum</foreign>).<note place='foot'>Ex. VIII, 15.</note>
The fault in all cases lies with the
sinner, who obstinately resists the call of grace. God's
co-operation in the matter is merely indirect. The
greater and stronger graces which He grants to ordinary
sinners, He withholds from the obdurate in punishment
of their malice. This is, however, by no means tantamount
to a withdrawal of sufficient grace.<note place='foot'>For
the solution of other difficulties
see Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>,
pp. 529 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) The Fathers speak of God's way of dealing
with obdurate sinners in a manner which clearly
shows their belief that He never entirely withdraws
His mercy. They insist that the light
of grace is never extinguished in the present
life. <q>God gave them over to a reprobate
mind,</q> says St. Augustine, <q>for such is the blindness
of the mind. Whosoever is given over
thereunto, is shut out from the interior light of
God: but not wholly as yet, whilst he is in this
life. For there is <q>outer darkness,</q> which is understood
to belong rather to the day of judgment;
that he should rather be wholly without
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
God, whosoever, whilst there is time, refuses correction.</q><note place='foot'>St.
Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>Enarr. in Ps.</hi>,
VI, n. 8: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dedit illos in reprobum
sensum (Rom. I, 28); nam ea
est caecitas mentis. In eam quisquis
datus fuerit, ab interiore Dei
luce secluditur, sed nondum penitus,
quum in hac vita est. Sunt enim
tenebrae exteriores, quae magis ad
diem iudicii pertinere intelliguntur,
ut penitus extra Deum sit, quisquis,
dum tempus est, corrigi noluerit.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
It follows that no sinner, how desperate soever
his case may appear, need be despaired of. As
long as there is life there is hope.<note place='foot'>St.
Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>Retractationes</hi>,
419: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De quocunque quamvis
pessimo homine hac in vita constituto
non est desperandum.</foreign></q></note> The Fathers
consistently teach that the reason why reprobates
are lost is not lack of grace but their own
malice. Thus St. Chrysostom comments on
Isaias' prophecy regarding the impenitence of the
Jews: <q>The reason they did not believe was
not that Isaias had predicted their unbelief, but
his prediction was based on the fact that they
would not believe. They were unable to believe, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
they had not the will to believe.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Tract. in
Ioa.</hi>, XII, 39. Similarly
<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, LIII, n. 6. For a complete
exposition of St. Augustine's
teaching on this point consult Dechamps,
<hi rend='italic'>De Haeresi Ianseniana</hi>,
III, 6 sqq., and Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Divina Actuali</hi>, thes. 40.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) The theological argument for our thesis is well
stated by St. Thomas. He distinguishes between <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>obstinatio
perfecta</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>obstinatio imperfecta</foreign>
and says: Perfect obstinacy exists only in hell. Imperfect obstinacy
is that of a sinner who has his will so firmly set on evil
that he is incapable of any but the faintest impulses towards
virtue, though even these are sufficient to prepare
the way for grace.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>De Veritate</hi>,
qu. 24, art. 11: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Haec
est obstinatio imperfecta, quâ aliquis potest
esse obstinatus in statu viae, dum
scilicet habet aliquis ita firmatam
voluntatem in peccato, quod non surgunt
motus ad bonum nisi debiles.
Quia tamen aliqui surgunt, ex iis
datur via, ut praeparentur ad gratiam.</foreign></q></note>
<q>If any one falls into sin after
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
having received Baptism,</q> says the Fourth Lateran Council, <q>he can
always be restored by sincere penance.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Lateran.</hi> IV (1215), cap.
<q><hi lang='la' rend='italic'>Firmiter</hi></q>:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et si post susceptionem
baptismi quisquam prolapsus
fuerit in peccatum, per veram potest
semper poenitentiam reparari.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 430.)</note>
As the power of the keys comprises all sins, even those
against the Holy Ghost, so divine grace is held out to all
sinners. The Montanistic doctrine of the unforgivableness
of the <q>three capital sins</q> (apostasy, murder, and
adultery) was already condemned as heretical during the
life-time of Tertullian. The sinner can obtain forgiveness
only by receiving the sacrament of Penance or making an
act of perfect contrition.<note place='foot'>Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Trid.</hi>, Sess. VI, cap.
14; Sess. XIV, cap. 1.</note> Justly, therefore, does the
Church regard despair of God's mercy as an additional
grievous sin. If the rigorists were right in asserting
that God in the end absolutely abandons the sinner, there
could be no hope of forgiveness, and despair would be
justified.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis III: The heathens, too, receive sufficient
graces for salvation.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This proposition may be qualified as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>certa</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. The <q>heathens</q> are those whom the
Gospel has not yet reached. They are called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>infideles
negativi</foreign> in contradistinction to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>infideles
positivi</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> apostates and formal heretics who
have fallen away from the faith. We assert that
God gives to the heathens sufficient grace to know
the truth and be saved. Pope Alexander VIII,
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
on December 7, 1690, condemned Arnauld's Jansenistic
proposition that <q>pagans, Jews, heretics,
and others of the same kind experience no influence
whatever from Christ, and it may therefore
be rightly inferred that there is in them a nude and helpless will, lacking
sufficient grace.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pagani,
Iudaei, haeretici aliique
huius generis nullum omnino
accipiunt a Iesu Christo influxum,
adeoque hinc recte inferes, in illis
esse voluntatem nudam et inermem
sine omni gratia sufficienti.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1295.)</note> A
proposition of similar import, set up by Quesnel,
was censured by Clement XI.<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Extra
ecclesiam nulla conceditur
gratia.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1379.)</note> Though not formally
defined, it is a certain truth&mdash;deducible
from the infallible teaching of the Church&mdash;that
God does not permit any one to perish for want
of grace.
</p>

<p>
a) The Biblical argument for our thesis is
based on the dogma that God wills all men to be
saved. 1 Tim. II, 4: <q>[God] will have all men
to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the true faith].</q> In speaking of the
<q>day of wrath,</q> St. Paul emphasizes the fact that
the Almighty Judge <q>will render to every man according
to his works,</q>&mdash;eternal life to the good,
wrath and damnation to the wicked.<note place='foot'>Rom. II, 6 sqq.</note> And he
continues: <q>But glory, and honor, and peace to
every one that worketh good, to the Jew first, and
also to the Greek; for there is no respect of persons
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
with God.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. II, 10 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gloria autem
et honor et pax omni operanti
bonum, Iudaeo primum et Graeco
(Ἔλληνι=pagano); non enim est
acceptio personarum (προσωποληψία)
apud Deum.</foreign></q></note> <q>Greek</q> is here evidently
synonymous with gentile or heathen. It follows
that the heathens are able to perform supernatural
salutary acts with the aid of grace, and
that they will receive the reward of eternal beatitude
if they lead a good life.
</p>

<p>
In another passage (1 Tim. IV, 10) the Apostle
calls Christ <q>the Saviour of all men, especially
of the faithful.</q><note place='foot'>σωτὴρ πάντων ἀνθρώπων,
μάλιστα πιστωῶν.</note> Consequently, Christ is the
Saviour also of unbelievers and heathens.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
1 Tim. II, 1 sqq.; John I, 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) St. Paul's teaching is faithfully echoed by
the Fathers. Thus St. Clement of Rome,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.
ad Corinth.</hi>, 1, 7.</note> in
commenting on the penitential sermons of Noë
and the prophet Jonas, says: <q>We may roam
through all the ages of history and learn that
the Lord in all generations<note place='foot'>ἐν γενεᾷ καὶ
γενεᾷ.</note> gave opportunity for
penance to all who wished to be converted, ...
even though they were strangers to him.</q><note place='foot'>ἀλλότριοι τοῦ Θεοῦ.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Chrysostom says in explanation of John I, 9: <q>If
He enlightens every man that comes into this world, how
is it that so many are without light? For not all know
Christ. Most assuredly He illumines, so far as He is
concerned.... For grace is poured out over all. It
flees or despises no one, be he Jew, Greek, barbarian
or Scythian, freedman or slave, man or woman, old or
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
young. It is the same for all, easily attainable by all,
it calls upon all with equal regard. As for those who
neglect to make use of this gift, they should ascribe
their blindness to themselves.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom.
in Ioa.</hi>, VIII, 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
Similar expressions can be culled from the anonymous
work <hi rend='italic'>De Vocatione Omnium Gentium</hi><note place='foot'>II,
c. 31.</note> and from the
writings of SS. Prosper and Fulgentius, and especially
from those of Orosius, who says that grace is given to
all men, including the heathen, without exception and at all
times.<note place='foot'>De <hi rend='italic'>Arbitrii Libertate</hi>, n. 19:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... quotidie per tempora, per
dies, per momenta, per ἄτομα et
cunctis et singulis.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
c) Catholic theologians have devoted considerable
thought to the question how God provides
for the salvation of the heathen.
</p>

<p>
To the uncivilized tribes may be applied what has been
said regarding the fate of unbaptized infants. The real
problem is: How does the merciful Creator provide for
those who are sufficiently intelligent to be able to
speculate on God, the soul, the future destiny of man,
etc.? Holy Scripture teaches: <q>Without faith it is
impossible to please God, for he that cometh to
God must believe that he is, and is a rewarder to them
that seek him.</q><note place='foot'>Heb. XI, 6.</note> Faith here means, not any kind of
religious belief, but that theological faith which the Tridentine
Council calls <q>the beginning, the foundation, and the root
of all justification.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Initium,
fundamentum et
radix omnis iustificationis.</foreign></q> Sess.
VI, cap. 8, <hi rend='italic'>apud</hi> Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 801.</note> Mere intellectual assent
to the existence of God, immortality, and retribution
would not be sufficient for salvation, even if elevated to the
supernatural sphere and transfigured by grace. This is
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
evident from the condemnation, by Pope Innocent XI, of
the proposition that <q>Faith in a wide sense, based on the
testimony of the created universe, or some other similar motive, is sufficient unto
justification.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fides
late dicta, ex testimonio
creaturarum similive motivo,
ad iustificationem sufficit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1173.)</note> The only sort
of faith that results in justification, according to the Vatican
Council, is <q>a supernatural virtue, whereby, inspired
and assisted by the grace of God, we believe that the
things which He has revealed are true; not because of the
intrinsic truth of the things, viewed by the natural light
of reason, but because of the authority of God Himself,
who reveals them, and who can neither be deceived nor
deceive.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... fides,
quâ Dei aspirante
et adiuvante gratiâ ab eo revelata
vera esse credimus, non propter intrinsecam
rerum veritatem naturali
rationis lumine perspectam, sed propter
auctoritatem ipsius Dei revelantis,
qui nec falli nec fallere potest.</foreign></q>
(Sess. III, cap. 3; Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1789.)</note> Of special importance is the following declaration
by the same Council: <q>Since without faith it is
impossible to please God and to attain to the fellowship
of His children, therefore without faith no one has ever attained
justification....</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quoniam
vero sine fide impossible
est placere Deo, ... ideo
nemini unquam sine illa contigit
iustificatio.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1793.)</note>
</p>

<p>
The Catechism demands of every one who desires to
be saved that he have a supernatural belief in six distinct
truths: the existence of God, retribution in the next
world, the Blessed Trinity, the Incarnation, the immortality
of the soul, and the necessity of grace. The
first two are certainly necessary for salvation, both
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fide explicitâ</foreign>
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitate medii</foreign>. With regard to the other
four there is a difference of opinion among theologians.
We base our argumentation on the stricter, though not
absolutely certain view, that all six articles must be believed
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitate medii</foreign>.
On this basis God's method of
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
providing sufficient graces for the heathen may be explained
in one of two ways, according as a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides explicita</foreign>
is demanded from them with regard to all the above-mentioned
dogmas, or a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides implicita</foreign> is deemed
sufficient in regard to all but the first two.
By <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides explicita</foreign> we
understand the express and fully developed faith of devout Christians;
by <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides implicita</foreign>, an undeveloped belief
of desire or, in other words, general readiness to believe
whatever God has revealed.
</p>

<p>
α) The defenders of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides explicita</foreign> theory
are compelled to assume that God must somehow
reveal to each individual heathen who lives according
to the dictates of his conscience, the six
truths necessary for salvation. <q>Faith cometh by
hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. X, 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
But how can the gentiles believe in a revelation that
has never been preached to them? Here is an undeniable
difficulty. Some theologians say: God enlightens them
interiorly about the truths necessary for salvation; or
He miraculously sends them an apostle, as He sent
St. Peter to Cornelius;<note place='foot'>Cfr. Acts X,
1 sqq.</note> or He instructs them through
the agency of an angel.<note place='foot'>Card. Toletus, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S.
Th.</hi>, I, qu. 1, art. 1.</note> None of these hypotheses can
be accepted as satisfactory. <q>Interior illumination</q> of
the kind postulated would practically amount to private
revelation. That God should grant a special private
revelation to every conscientious pagan is highly improbable.
Again, an angel can no more be the <emph>ordinary</emph>
means of conversion than the miraculous apparition of a
missionary. Nevertheless, these three hypotheses admirably
illustrate the firm belief of the Church in the universality
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
of God's saving will, inasmuch as they express
the conviction of her theologians that He would work a
miracle rather than deny His grace to the poor benighted
heathen.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>De Verit.</hi>, qu.
14, art. 11, ad 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hoc ad
divinam providentiam pertinet, ut
cuilibet provideat de necessariis ad
salutem, dummodo ex parte eius non
impediatur. Si enim aliquis taliter
(in silvis vel inter bruta animalia)
nutritus ductum naturalis rationis
sequeretur in appetitu boni et fuga
mali, certissime est tenendum quod
ei Deus vel per internam inspirationem
revelaret ea, quae sunt ad credendum
necessaria, vel aliquem fidei
praedicatorem ad eum dirigeret, sicut
misit Petrum ad Cornelium.</foreign></q></note> The difficulties to which we have adverted
constitute a strong argument in favor of another theological
theory which regards explicit belief in the Trinity and the Incarnation
merely as a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas praecepti</foreign>, from
which one may be dispensed.
</p>

<p>
β) The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides implicita</foreign>
theory is far more plausible, for it postulates no miracles, implicit faith
(or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides in voto</foreign>) being independent of the
external preaching of the Gospel, just as the baptism
of desire (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>baptismus in voto</foreign>) is independent of
the use of water.
</p>

<p>
Cardinal Gotti regards the first-mentioned of the two
theories as safer (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>tutior</foreign>),
but admits that the other is
highly probable, because it has the support of St. Thomas.<note place='foot'>Gotti,
<hi rend='italic'>De Fide</hi>, qu. 2, dub. 4,
§ 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sententia negans fidem explicitam
Christi et Trinitatis esse ita
necessariam, ut sine ea nemo iustificari
vel salvari queat, valde probabilis
est. Eam enim videtur docere
S. Thomas tum 2&mdash;2 p., qu. 10, art.
4, tum 3 p., qu. 69, art. 4, ubi de
Cornelio Centurione ait: Ante baptismum
Cornelius et alii similes consequuntur
gratiam et virtutes per
fidem Christi et desiderium baptismi
implicite vel explicite.</foreign></q></note>
However, a great difficulty remains. Though it may
suffice to hold the dogmas of the Trinity and the Incarnation,
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a fortiori</foreign> those of the immortality of the
soul and the necessity of grace, with an implicit faith, it is
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
the consentient teaching of Revelation, the Church, and
Catholic divines that the two principal truths of religion,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: the existence of God and retribution, must be held
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fide explicitâ</foreign> and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitate medii</foreign>, because a man cannot
be converted to God unless He knows Him. But
how is he to acquire a knowledge of God? Does this
not also necessitate a miracle (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the sending of an angel
or of a missionary, which we have rejected as improbable)?
There can be but one answer to this question.
Unaided reason may convince a thoughtful pagan of the
existence of God and of divine retribution, and as these
two fundamental truths have no doubt penetrated to the
farthest corners of the earth also as remnants of primitive
revelation, their promulgation may be said to be
contained in the traditional instruction which the heathen
receive from their forebears. This external factor of
Divine Revelation, assisted by interior grace, may engender
a supernatural act of faith, which implicitly includes
belief in Christ, Baptism, etc., and through which
the heathen are eventually cleansed from sin and attain to
justification.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Fr. Schmid, <hi rend='italic'>Die ausserordentlichen
Heilswege für die gefallene
Menschheit</hi>, pp. 225 sqq.,
Brixen 1899.</note>
</p>

<p>
Some theologians hold that those to whom the Gospel
has never been preached, may be saved by a quasi-faith
based on purely natural motives.<note place='foot'>A. Fischer,
<hi rend='italic'>De Salute Infidelium</hi>,
Essen 1886; Heinrich-Gutberlet,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>, Vol.
VIII, pp. 491 sqq. On their teaching
see P. Minges, O. F. M., <hi rend='italic'>Compendium
Theologiae Dogmaticae
Generalis</hi>, pp. 270 sqq., Munich
1902.</note>
</p>

<p>
For the rest, no one will presume to dictate to Almighty
God how and by what means He shall communicate
His grace to the heathen. It is enough, and very
consoling, too, to know that all men receive sufficient
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
grace to save their souls, and no one is eternally damned
except through his own fault.<note place='foot'>With regard to certain other
controversies on this subject consult
Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp.
535 sqq., and Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Instit. Theol.</hi>,
Vol. III, pp. 109 sqq., Paris 1896.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Readings</hi>:&mdash;*Didacus Ruiz, <hi rend='italic'>De Voluntate
Dei</hi>, disp. 19 sqq.&mdash;Petavius, <hi rend='italic'>De Deo</hi>, X, 4 sqq.;
<hi rend='italic'>De Incarnatione</hi>, XIII, 1 sqq.&mdash;Fontana,
<hi rend='italic'>Bulla <q>Unigenitus</q> Dogmatice Propugnata</hi>, prop. 12,
c. 5, Rome 1717.&mdash;Passaglia, <hi rend='italic'>De Partitione Voluntatis Divinae
in Primam et Secundam</hi>, Rome 1851.&mdash;*Franzelin, <hi rend='italic'>De Deo
Uno</hi>, thes. 49-51, Rome 1883.&mdash;*Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina
Actuali</hi>, thes. 59-62, Gulpen 1885.&mdash;A. Fischer, <hi rend='italic'>De Salute
Infidelium</hi>, Essen 1886.&mdash;*J. Bucceroni, <hi rend='italic'>De Auxilio
Sufficiente Infidelibus Dato</hi>, Rome 1890.&mdash;Fr. Schmid, <hi rend='italic'>Die
ausserordentlichen Heilswege für die gefallene Menschheit</hi>, Brixen 1899.&mdash;Chr.
Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelectiones
Dogmaticae</hi>, Vol. II, 3rd ed., pp. 144 sqq., Freiburg 1906.&mdash;L.
Capéran, <hi rend='italic'>Le Problème du Salut des Infidèles</hi>, Paris 1912.&mdash;A.
Wagner, <hi rend='italic'>Doctrina de Gratia Sufficiente</hi>, Graz 1911.&mdash;J.
Bainvel, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>Is There Salvation Outside the Catholic Church?</hi>
(tr. J. L. Weidenhan), St. Louis 1917.
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Article 3. The Predestination Of The Elect</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>What is Meant by Predestination.</hi>&mdash;We
have shown that God antecedently wills to
save all men,<note place='foot'>See Articles
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_1'>1</ref> and
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_2'>2</ref>,
<hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>.</note> and that He gives to all sufficient
grace to work out their eternal salvation.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, Sacred Scripture assures us
that some are lost through their own fault. Cfr.
Matth. XXV, 41: <q>Depart from me, you cursed,
into everlasting fire.</q>
</p>

<p>
It follows that God's will to save, considered
as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas consequens</foreign>,
remains ineffective with
regard to a portion of the human race, and consequently,
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
in this respect, is no longer universal
but particular.
</p>

<p>
Being omniscient, God has foreseen this from
all eternity and disposed His decrees accordingly.
It is in this sense that Catholic theology teaches
the existence of a twofold predestination: one to
Heaven, for those who die in the state of grace,
another to hell, for those who depart this life in
mortal sin.
</p>

<p>
Present-day usage reserves the term <emph>predestination</emph>
for the election of the blessed.
</p>

<p>
a) Rightly does the Council of Trent call predestination
a <q>hidden mystery.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Trid.</hi>, Sess. VI, cap. 12:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Arcanum divinae praedestinationis
mysterium.</foreign></q></note> For in the last analysis
it rests solely with God, who are to be admitted to Heaven
and who condemned to hell. But why does God give
to some merely sufficient grace, with which they neglect
to coöperate, while on others He showers efficacious
graces that infallibly lead to eternal salvation? In this
unequal distribution of efficacious grace lies the sublime
mystery of predestination, as St. Augustine well
knew, for he says in his treatise On the Gift of Perseverance:
<q>Therefore, of two infants equally bound by
original sin, why the one is taken and the other left;
and of two wicked men already mature in years, why
one should be so called that he follows Him that calleth,
while the other is either not called at all, or is not called
in such a manner,&mdash;are unsearchable judgments of
God.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Dono Perseverantiae</hi>, n. 21:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ex duobus parvulis originali peccato
pariter obstrictis cur iste assumatur,
ille relinquatur et ex duobus
aetate iam grandibus impiis, cur
iste ita vocetur ut vocantem sequatur,
ille autem aut non vocetur
[praedicatione fidei] aut non ita
vocetur, inscrutabilia sunt iudicia
Dei.</foreign></q> On this mysterious dispensation
see Scheeben, <hi rend='italic'>Die Mysterien
des Christentums</hi>, § 99-103, 3rd ed.,
Freiburg 1912, and Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>, thes. 62.</note>
</p>

<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>

<p>
b) What is meant by <q>predestination of the elect</q>?
In view of the many errors that have arisen with regard
to this important dogma, it is necessary to start with
clearly defined terms.
</p>

<p>
Predestination may mean one of three different things.
A man may be simply predestined to receive certain graces
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedestinatio ad gratiam
tantum</foreign>); or he may be predestined
to enjoy eternal happiness without regard to
any merits of his own (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedestinatio
ad gloriam tantum</foreign>);
or, again, he may be predestined to both grace and
glory, glory as the end, grace as a means to that end&mdash;vocation,
justification, and final perseverance. When the
concepts of grace and glory are considered separately, and
each is made the object of a special predestination, we
have what is called incomplete or inadequate predestination
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedestinatio
incompleta sive inadaequata</foreign>). It
is this incomplete predestination that St. Paul<note place='foot'>Eph.
I, 3 sqq., and in other passages.</note> and St.
Augustine<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Dono Persev.</hi>, c. 10, n. 19:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Praedestinatio est gratiae praeparatio,
gratia vero iam ipsa donatio.</foreign></q></note> have in mind when they apply the term
to the vocation of men to grace, faith, and justification. Theologians
speak of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedestinatio ad gloriam tantum</foreign>, that
is, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ante praevisa merita</foreign>,
as a true predestination, but disagree
as to its existence.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. infra</hi>, pp.
<ref target='Pg199'>199</ref> sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
The dogma of predestination, which mainly concerns
us here, has for its sole object predestination in the complete
or adequate sense of the term, which is explained
by St. Augustine as follows: <q>Predestination is nothing
else than the foreknowledge and the preparation of
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
those gifts of God whereby they who are delivered are most certainly delivered
[<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> saved].</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Dono Persev.</hi>, c. 14, n. 35:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Praedestinatio nihil est aliud quam
praescientia et praeparatio beneficiorum
Dei, quibus certissime liberantur
[scil. salvantur] quicunque
liberantur.</foreign></q></note> St. Thomas expresses
himself more succinctly: <q>Predestination is
the preparation of grace in the present, and of glory in
the future.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>S. Theol.</hi>, 1a, qu. 23, art. 2:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Praedestinatio est praeparatio gratiae
in praesenti et gloriae in futuro.</foreign></q>
On the Biblical, the Patristic,
and the theological use of
the term, see Chr. Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelect.
Dogmat.</hi>, Vol. II, 3rd ed., pp.
189 sqq., Freiburg 1906.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Dogma.</hi>&mdash;Complete predestination involves:
(a) the first grace of vocation (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
prima praeveniens</foreign>), especially faith as the beginning,
foundation, and root of justification;
(b) a number of additional actual graces for the
successful accomplishment of the process; (c)
justification itself as the beginning of the state of
grace; (d) the grace of final perseverance; (e)
eternal happiness in Heaven.
</p>

<p>
The question arises; Do men really seek and
find their eternal salvation with infallible certainty
by passing through these successive stages&mdash;not
merely in the foreknowledge of God
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praescientia futurorum</foreign>), but by virtue of an
eternal decree (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>decretum praedestinationis</foreign>)?
</p>

<p>
The Pelagians asserted that man works out his eternal
salvation of his own free will, and that consequently
God merely foreknows but does not fore-ordain who shall
be saved. The Semipelagians held that the beginning of
faith (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>initium fidei</foreign>)
and final perseverance (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>donum perseverantiae</foreign>)
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
are not pure graces but may be obtained by
natural means, without special aid from above. Against
these heretics the Catholic Church has always taught the
eternal predestination of the elect as an article of faith.<note place='foot'>The
Tridentine Council presupposes
it as an unquestioned dogma
(Sess. VI, cap. 12).</note>
</p>

<p>
a) St. Paul says explicitly: <q>We know that to
them that love God, all things work together unto
good, to such as, according to his purpose, are
called to be saints. For whom he foreknew, he
also predestinated to be made conformable to the
image of his Son; that he might be the firstborn
amongst many brethren. And whom he predestinated,
them he also called. And whom he
called, them he also justified. And whom he justified,
them he also glorified.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. VIII, 28
sqq.; <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Scimus
autem quoniam diligentibus Deum
omnia cooperantur in bonum, iis
qui secundum propositum vocati sunt
sancti (κατὰ πρόθεσιν κλητοῖς
οὔσιν). Nam quos praescivit, et
praedestinavit conformes fieri imaginis
Filii sui, ut sit ipse primogenitus
in multis fratribus; quos autem
praedestinavit, hos et vocavit; et quos
vocavit, hos et iustificavit: quos autem
iustificavit, illos et glorificavit.</foreign></q></note> Here we have
all the elements of complete predestination: God's
eternal foreknowledge (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praescivit</foreign>,
προέγνω), an eternal decree of the divine will
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedestinavit</foreign>,
προώρισε), and the various stages of justification,
beginning with vocation (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vocavit</foreign>,
ἐκάλησε) up to justification proper
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>iustificavit</foreign>,
ἐδικαίωσε), and eternal beatitude
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>glorificavit</foreign>,
ἐδόξασεν).<note place='foot'>Cfr. Eph. I, 4-11.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) The Fathers of the fifth century undoubtedly
taught the predestination of the elect as an
article of faith. Thus St. Augustine says:
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
<q>There never was a time when the Church of
Christ did not hold this faith in predestination,
which is now defended with fresh solicitude
against the new heretics.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Praedestinatione Sanctorum</hi>,
c. 25: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Praedestinationis huius
fidem, quae contra novos haereticos
novâ nunc solicitudine defenditur,
nunquam Ecclesia Christi non
habuit.</foreign></q></note> His faithful disciple
St. Prosper writes: <q>No Catholic denies
predestination by God.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Resp.
ad Obiect. Gallor.</hi>, 1:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Praedestinationem Dei nullus
Catholicus negat.</foreign></q></note> And again: <q>It
would be as impious to deny predestination as to
oppose grace itself.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.
ad Rufin.</hi>: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Praedestinationem
tam impium est negare quam
ipsi gratiae contraire.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
c) Several important theological corollaries
follow from the dogma of predestination.
</p>

<p>
α) The first is the immutability of the divine
decree of predestination. This immutability is
based on God's infallible foreknowledge that certain
individuals will die in the state of grace, and
on His unchangeable will to reward them with
eternal happiness.
</p>

<p>
St. Augustine says: <q>If any one of these [the predestined]
perishes, God is mistaken; but none of them
perish because God is not mistaken.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Correptione et Gratia</hi>, c.
7, n. 14: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Horum si quisquam perit,
fallitur Deus; sed nemo eorum
perit, quia non fallitur Deus.</foreign></q> On
the question how this infallible foreknowledge
is compatible with the
dogma of free-will, see Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God, His Knowability, Essence, and
Attributes</hi>, pp. 364 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
God's unerring foreknowledge is symbolized by the
<q>Book of Life.</q><note place='foot'>Cfr. Apoc. XVII, 8: <q><hi rend='italic'>Liber
vitae</hi>, τὸ βιβλίον τῆς ζωῆς.</q> Cfr.
St. Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De Civ. Dei</hi>, XX, 13:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Praescientia Dei, quae non potest
falli, liber vitae est.</foreign></q></note> Christ Himself said to His Apostles:
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
<q>Rejoice in this, that your names are written in
heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Luke X, 20: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gaudete quod
nomina vestra scripta sunt in coelis.</foreign></q></note>
The <q>Book of Life</q> admits neither addition
nor erasure. This does not, however, mean that
a man is unable to change God's hypothetical decree
of predestination with regard to himself into an
absolute one. He can do this by prayer, good works,
and faithful co-operation with grace.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
2 Pet. I, 10: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Satagite,
ut per bona opera certam (βεβαίαν)
vestram vocationem et electionem
faciatis.</foreign></q></note> Whatever promotes
our salvation is included in the infallible foreknowledge
of God, and consequently also in the scope of predestination.
In this sense, but in no other, can we accept
the somewhat paradoxical maxim: <q>If you are not predestined,
conduct yourself so that you may be predestined.</q>
Sacred Scripture occasionally refers to another
<q>Book of Life,</q> which contains the names of all
the faithful, irrespective of their predestination. This
<q>book,</q> of course, is capable of alterations. Cfr. Apoc.
III, 5: <q>I will not blot out his name out of the book
of life.</q><note place='foot'>Apoc. III, 5:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non delebo
nomen eius de libro vitae.</foreign></q> Cfr.
Ex. XXXII, 32; Ps. LXVIII, 29.</note> Finally, there is the <q>Book of Reprobation,</q>
which records the wicked deeds of men and by which the
unrepentant sinners will be judged. This is the <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>liber
scriptus</foreign></q> of the <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dies Irae</foreign></q>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Liber scriptus
proferetur.</foreign></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In
quo totum continetur.</foreign></q><note place='foot'>On the
<hi rend='italic'>liber vitae</hi>, cfr. St.
Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>S. Theol.</hi>, 1a, qu. 24, art.
1-3; and Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische
Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII, § 435.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
β) If the divine decree of predestination is immutable,
the number of the elect must be definitively
fixed. <q>The number [of those who are
predestined to the kingdom of God] is so certain,</q>
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
says St. Augustine, <q>that no one can either be
added to or taken from them.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Corrept. et Grat.</hi>, c. 13:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... quorum ita certus est numerus,
ut nec addatur eis quisquam
nec minuatur ex eis.</foreign></q></note> We must distinguish
between the absolute and the relative
number of the predestined.
</p>

<p>
God, being omniscient, knows not only the abstract
number of the elect, but every individual predestined to
Heaven. To us the number of the elect is wrapped in
impenetrable mystery. St. Thomas justly observes:
<q>Some say that as many men will be saved as angels
fell; some, so many as there were angels left; others,
in fine, so many as the number of angels who fell, added
to that of all the angels created by God. It is, however,
better to say that <q>God alone knows the number
for whom is reserved eternal happiness,</q> as the prayer
for the living and the dead expresses it.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>S.
Theol.</hi>, 1a, qu. 23, art. 7:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De numero omnium praedestinatorum
hominum quis sit, dicunt quidam
quod tot ex hominibus salvabuntur,
quot angeli ceciderunt; quidam
vero, quod tot ex hominibus salvabuntur,
quot angeli remanserunt;
quidam vero, quod tot ex hominibus
salvabuntur, quot angeli ceciderunt
et insuper tot quot fuerunt
angeli creati. Sed melius dicitur
quod soli Deo est cognitus numerus
electorum in superna felicitate
locandus, ut habet collecta pro vivis
et defunctis.</foreign></q></note> Whether
God will round out the number of the elect by suddenly
precipitating the end of the world or by a sort of <q>natural
selection,</q> is an open question. To assume the latter
could hardly be reconciled with the dogma of the
universality of His saving will. St. Augustine seems to
favor the former.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Bono Viduitatis</hi>, n. 28:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quasi propter aliud retardetur hoc
saeculum, nisi ut impleatur praedestinatus
numerus ille sanctorum,
quo citius impleto profecto nec terminus
saeculi differetur.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
As regards the relative number of the elect, some
writers (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> Massillon) represent it as so infinitesimally
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
small that it would almost drive a saint to despair,&mdash;<q>as
if the Church had been established for the express purpose
of populating hell.</q><note place='foot'>Dieringer,
<hi rend='italic'>Epistelbuch</hi>, <q>Fest
Allerheiligen.</q></note> Even St. Thomas held that
relatively few are saved.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>S. Theol.</hi>,
1a, qu. 23, art. 7, ad 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pauciores sunt
qui salvantur.</foreign></q></note> But the arguments adduced
in support of this contention are by no means convincing.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmat.
Theol.</hi>, Vol. VIII, pp. 363
sqq., and W. Schneider, <hi rend='italic'>Das andere
Leben</hi>, 9th ed., pp. 476 sqq., Paderborn
1908.</note>
Recently, the Jesuit Father Castelein<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Le Rigorisme,
le Nombre des
Élus et la Doctrine du Salut</hi>, 2nd
ed., Bruxelles 1899.</note> impugned
the rigorist theory with weighty arguments. He
was sharply attacked by the Redemptorist Godts,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Paucitate Salvandorum
quid Docuerunt Sancti</hi>, 3d ed.,
Bruxelles 1899.</note> who
marshalled a great number of authorities in favor of
the sterner view. The controversy cannot be decided
either on Scriptural or traditional grounds. In our
pessimistic age it is more grateful and consoling to
assume that the majority of Christians, especially
Catholics, will be saved.<note place='foot'>Cfr. 1 Tim. IV, 10: σωτὴρ
πάντων ἀνθρώπων, μάλιστα πιστῶν.
This opinion is convincingly
defended by the Spanish theologian
Genér (<hi rend='italic'>Theol. Dogmat. Scholast.</hi>, II,
342 sqq., Rome 1767.) Timid souls
may profitably ponder what Thomas
à Kempis says in the <hi rend='italic'>Imitation</hi>, I,
25.</note> If we add to this number not
a few Jews, Mohammedans, and heathens, it is probably
safe to estimate the number of the elect as at least equal
to that of the reprobates. Were it smaller, <q>it could
be said to the shame and offense of the divine majesty
and mercy, that the [future] kingdom of Satan is larger
than the kingdom of Christ.</q><note place='foot'>Genér,
<hi rend='italic'>Theol. Dogmat. Scholast.</hi>,
II, 342: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... ne dici possit
cum dedecore et iniuria divinae maiestatis
et clementiae, maius esse imperium
daemonis quam Christi.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Motive of Predestination.</hi>&mdash;The
efficient cause of predestination is God; its instrumental
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
cause, grace; its final cause, the divine
glory; its primary meritorious cause, the merits
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. On these
points all theologians are agreed. Not so as to
the motive that induced God to predestine certain
individuals to the exclusion of others. The question
narrows itself down to this: What influence,
if any, do the merits of a man exert on the
eternal decree of predestination?&mdash;and may be
formulated in three different ways.
</p>

<p>
a) What influence do the merits of a man exert
on his predestination to the initial grace of
vocation? Recalling the dogma of the absolute
gratuity of grace, our answer must be: None.
For whatever merits one may have acquired
before he receives the initial grace of vocation,
must be purely natural, and consequently
worthless in the eyes of God for supernatural
predestination. <q>To assume,</q> says St. Thomas,
<q>that there is on our part some merit, the foreknowledge
of which [on the part of God] would
be the cause [motive] of our predestination,
would be to assume that grace is given to us [as
a reward] of our [natural] merits.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Lect.
in Ep. ad Rom.</hi>, VIII, 6:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unde ponere quod aliquod meritum
ex parte nostra praesupponatur,
cuius praescientia sit ratio [scil.
motivum] praedestinationis, nihil est
aliud quam supponere gratiam dari
ex meritis nostris [scil. naturalibus].</foreign></q>
<hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_2'>Ch. II, Sect. 2</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) What influence do the merits of a man
exert on his predestination to grace and glory?
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
Catholic theologians are unanimous in holding
that, since grace is absolutely gratuitous and
inseparably connected with glory as its effect, the
union of both can no more be based upon <emph>natural</emph>
merit than the initial grace of vocation itself,
which transmits the quality of gratuitousness to
each and every one of the graces that follow in
its wake, up to and including justification and
eternal beatitude. Those among the Fathers who
defended the gratuity of predestination against
the Pelagians and Semipelagians, really aimed at
safeguarding the gratuity of initial grace, in order
not to be constrained to say with Pelagius
that <q>the grace of God is given as a reward of
merit.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratiam Dei
secundum merita
dari.</foreign></q></note> <q>What compelled me in this work of
mine [<hi rend='italic'>De Dono Perseverantiae</hi>] to defend more
abundantly and clearly those passages of Scripture
in which predestination is commended,</q> says
St. Augustine, <q>if not the Pelagian assertion that
God's grace is given according to our [natural]
merits?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Dono Perseverant.</hi>, n. 53:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quid autem coegit loca Scripturarum,
quibus praedestinatio commendata
est, copiosius et enucleatius
isto nostro labore defendi, nisi quod
Pelagiani dicunt, gratiam Dei secundum
merita nostra [naturalia] dari?</foreign></q></note> Obviously these Fathers did not
have in view the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedestinatio ad gloriam
tantum</foreign>, as the champions of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedestinatio
ante praevisa merita</foreign> mistakenly assert, but what
they meant was that complete predestination
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
which comprises grace and glory as one whole.
Similarly, the early Schoolmen, when they speak
of the <q>gratuity of predestination,</q> usually mean
complete predestination.<note place='foot'>Charles Du Plessis d'Argentré
(d. 1740), after a careful study of
all Scholastic works written between
1120 and 1708, concluded: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Veteres
Scholastici de causa praedestinationis
omnino considerate et ad
gratiam et ad gloriam praecipue
agebant. Idea nolebant eam esse
ex praevisis meritis, quia gratia, quae
in ea includitur, non datur nec proin
praedestinatur ob praevisa merita.</foreign></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>De Praedest.</hi>, c. 10, § 1).</note> D'Argentré's researches
show how necessary it is to draw sharp
distinctions and carefully to establish the real
state of the question before claiming the common
teaching of the Scholastics in favor of any particular
theory of predestination.
</p>

<p>
c) What influence do the <emph>supernatural</emph> merits
of a man exert on his predestination to glory as
such? Here the controversy begins. Predestination
may be considered either as the cause of
supernatural merit or as its effect. If it is considered
as the cause, the problem takes this shape:
Did God, by an absolute decree, and without any
regard to their future supernatural merits, eternally
predestine certain men to the glory of heaven,
and only subsequently decide to give them the
efficacious graces necessary to reach that end, particularly
final perseverance? If, on the other
hand, predestination be considered as an effect of
supernatural merit, the question will be: Did
God predestine certain men to the glory of Heaven
by a merely hypothetical decree, making His will
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
to save them dependent on His infallible foreknowledge
of their supernatural merits? The
lack of decisive Scriptural and Patristic texts on
this subject has led to a division of Catholic opinion,
some theologians favoring absolute predestination
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ante praevisa merita</foreign>, others hypothetical
predestination <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>post praevisa merita</foreign>. Without
concealing our conviction that absolute predestination
is untenable, we shall set forth both
theories impartially and examine the arguments
on which they rely.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_3_No_4'/>
4. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Orthodox Predestinationism, or the
Theory of Predestination ante Praevisa
Merita.</hi>&mdash;Some theologians conceive the divine
scheme of salvation in this wise: (a) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In ordine
intentionis</foreign>, God, by an absolute decree, first predestines
certain men to eternal salvation, and
then, in consequence of this decree, decides to give
them all the graces necessary to be saved; (b)
in time, however, or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in ordine executionis</foreign>,
He observes the reverse order, that is to say, He
first bestows the pre-appointed graces and subsequently
the glory of heaven as a reward of supernatural
merit acquired by the aid of those graces.
</p>

<p>
This theory reverses the relation of grace and
glory. While it correctly<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. infra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_III_Section_3'>Part II, Ch. III, Sect. 3</ref>.</note>
represents glory as the fruit
and reward of supernatural merit in the order of execution,
it wrongly represents it in the order of intention as
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
the cause of supernatural merit, whereas it is merely an effect. This
opinion is championed by most Thomists,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>,
Bañez, Alvarez, Lemos,
Gonet, Contenson, Goudin.</note>
some Augustinians,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>, Berti and
Norisius.</note> and a few Molinists.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>,
Suarez, Ruiz, De Lugo,
Bellarmine.</note> Their arguments
may be sketched as follows:
</p>

<p>
a) In innumerable passages of Sacred Scripture
predestination to eternal happiness is represented
as a work of pure mercy, nay, even as an
arbitrary act of God. Take, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Matth. XXIV,
22 sqq.: <q>And unless those days had been shortened,
no flesh should be saved: but for the sake of
the elect those days shall be shortened.... For
there shall arise false Christs and false prophets,
and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch as to deceive (if possible)
even the elect.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nisi
breviati fuissent dies illi,
non fieret salva omnis caro, sed
propter electos (διὰ τοὺς ἐκλεκτούς)
breviabuntur dies illi.... Surgent
enim pseudochristi, ... ita ut in
errorem inducantur, si fieri potest,
etiam electi.</foreign></q></note>
Here, it is claimed, the elect are represented as so
thoroughly confirmed in faith and in good works
as to be proof against error.
</p>

<p>
This conclusion is unwarranted. The phrase <q>those
days</q> manifestly refers either to the destruction of Jerusalem
or to the end of the world. If it refers to the destruction
of Jerusalem, the <q>elect,</q> according to Biblical
usage,<note place='foot'>Cfr. Col. III, 12; 1 Pet. I, 1.</note>
are the faithful Christian inhabitants of the Holy
City, for whose sake God promises to shorten the terrible
siege. If it referred to the end of the world,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>electi</foreign> would
indeed stand for <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedestinati</foreign>,
but the context would not
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
forbid us to interpret their predestination hypothetically,
as merely indicating the immutability of the divine decree,
which is not denied by the opponents of the theory.
</p>

<p>
Another text quoted in favor of absolute predestination
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ante praevisa merita</foreign>,
is Acts XIII, 48: <q>As many
as were ordained (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praeordinati</foreign>,
τεταγμένοι) to life everlasting,
believed.</q> Here, we are told, predestination to
eternal life is given as the motive why many believed.
But the text really says nothing at all about predestination.
Τεταγμένοι is not synonymous with προτεταγμένοι or
προωρισμένοι. The more probable explanation is the following:
As many believed as were disposed to receive
the faith. It is wellnigh impossible to assume that all
who received the faith at that time were predestined,
while those that refused to be converted were without
exception reprobates. But even if
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praeordinati</foreign> were
synonymous with <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedestinati</foreign>,
the text would merely
say that certain predestined souls embraced the faith,
without affording any clue as to the relation between
conversion and predestination.
</p>

<p>
The ninth chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans
is the main reliance of the advocates of absolute predestinationism,
though the passage is unfit to serve as a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>locus classicus</foreign>
because of its obscurity. Let us examine
a few of the verses most frequently quoted. Rom.
IX, 13: <q>Jacob I have loved, but Esau I have hated,</q>
is alleged to prove the absolute predestination of Jacob
and the negative reprobation of Esau. But many theologians
hold that Esau was saved, and, besides, the
Apostle is not dealing with predestination to glory, but
with Jacob's vocation to be the progenitor of the Messias.
Esau, who was not an Israelite but an Idumaean,
was simply passed over in this choice
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>odio habere
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
minus diligere</foreign>; cfr. Matth. X, 37). If the passage is
interpreted typically, it should be done in harmony
with the context, that is to say, as referring to the gratuity
of grace, not to predestination.
</p>

<p>
The same may be said of Rom. IX, 16 and 18: <q>It is
not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of
God that showeth mercy.... He hath mercy on whom he will, and whom
he will he hardeneth.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non
volentis neque currentis,
sed miserentis est Dei ... Cuius
vult miseretur, et quem vult indurat.</foreign></q>
On the meaning of this
text <hi rend='italic'>v. supra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>,
<ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
The strongest text alleged by the advocates of absolute
predestination is Rom. IX, 20 sq.: <q>O man, who art
thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing formed
say to him that formed it: Why hast thou made me
thus? Or hath not the potter power over the clay, of
the same lump to make one vessel unto honor and another
unto dishonor?</q> Here the Apostle really seems
to have thought of predestination. But the simile must
not be pressed, lest we arrive at the Calvinistic blasphemy
that God positively predestined some men to heaven and
others to hell. The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>tertium
comparationis</foreign> is not the act
of the Divine Artificer, but the willingness of man to
yield his will to God like clay in the hands of a potter.
</p>

<p>
Nor is it admissible to read into the Apostle's thought
even a <emph>negative</emph> reprobation of certain men. For the
primary intention of the Epistle to the Romans is to
insist on the gratuity of man's vocation to Christianity
and to reject the presumption that the Mosaic law and
their bodily descent from Abraham gave the Jews preference
over the heathens. The Epistle to the Romans has
no bearing whatever on the speculative question whether
or not the free vocation of grace is a necessary result of
eternal predestination to glory.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Franzelin, <hi rend='italic'>De
Deo Uno</hi>, thes. 65; Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmat.
Theol.</hi>, Vol. VIII, pp. 345 sqq.;
Chr. Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Prael. Dogmat.</hi>, Vol. II,
3rd ed., pp. 212 sqq., Freiburg 1906;
Val. Weber, <hi rend='italic'>Kritische Geschichte
der Exegese des 9. Kapitels des
Römerbriefes</hi>, Würzburg 1889.</note>
</p>

<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>

<p>
b) Among the Fathers the only one to whom
the advocates of absolute predestinationism can
appeal with some show of justice is St. Augustine,
who, with the possible exception of Prosper
and Fulgentius, was the most rigorous among
early ecclesiastical writers,&mdash;so rigorous, in fact,
that Oswald does not hesitate to call him <q>the head and
front of all rigorists in the Church.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die
Lehre von der Heiligung</hi>,
p. 242, 3rd ed., Paderborn 1885.</note>
</p>

<p>
However, this is saying too much. Augustine's genuine
teaching is still in dispute among our ablest theologians.
Some<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>, Petrus de Comitibus, O.
S. A. (<hi rend='italic'>De Praedest. et Reprobat.</hi>,
disp. 3, art. 4 sqq.), Tricassinus
(<hi rend='italic'>De Praedest.</hi>), and the Jesuits
Lessius, Gregory of Valentia, Franzelin,
and Schrader.</note> deny that he broke with the almost
unanimous teaching of his predecessors, while others
think that in the treatises <hi rend='italic'>De Dono
Perseverantiae</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>De
Praedestinatione Sanctorum</hi>, and in several of his letters,
the Saint frankly taught absolute predestinationism. The
latter group of writers is split into two classes. A number
of Thomists and Cardinal Bellarmine not only assert
that Augustine taught absolute predestination, but boldly
adopt his supposed teaching. Petavius, Maldonatus, Cercià, Oswald,
and others censure this view. Franzelin<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Deo Uno</hi>, p. 677: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si
vero dissensus esset manifestus, ut
prudenter [cum ceteris patribus]
conciliari non posset, tum sane non
dubitarem, cum Pighio, Catharino,
Osorio, Camerario, Maldonato,
Toleto, Petavio, reverenter ab Augustino
discedere, quum haec non
posset esse nisi privata eius sententia.</foreign></q></note>
undoubtedly strikes the right note when he says:
<q>If there were a manifest discrepancy between Augustine's
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
teaching and that of the other Fathers, I should not
hesitate to follow Pighius, Catharinus, Osorius, Camerarius,
Maldonatus,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Praedest.</hi>,
qu. 4.</note> Toletus,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S. Theol. S.
Thomae Aqu.</hi>, I, qu. 23, art. 5, conclus.
2.</note> and Petavius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Deo</hi>,
X, col. 9.</note> in reverently
departing from his doctrine, because in that case we
should be dealing merely with a private opinion.</q><note place='foot'>A careful
analysis of the Augustinian
texts bearing on this question
will be found in the <hi rend='italic'>Theol.
Wirceburg.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De Deo Uno</hi>, n. 231
sqq., and Franzelin, <hi rend='italic'>De Deo Uno</hi>,
thes. 53.</note>
Under these circumstances the Patristic argument for the
theory of absolute predestination evidently lacks convincingness.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmat.
Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII, pp. 351
sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) It was probably because they felt its weakness
that some of the later champions of the
theory attempted to prove absolute predestination
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ante praevisa merita</foreign> by philosophical
arguments. Gonet reasons as follows: <q>He who proceeds in
an orderly way, wills the end before he wills the
means necessary to attain it. But God proceeds
in an orderly way. Therefore he wills the end
before the means. Now, glory is an end, and
merits are means to attain that end. Consequently,
God wills glory before He wills merits,
and a man's preëlection to glory cannot be based
on foreknowledge of his merits.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Clypeus
Thomist.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De Praedest.</hi>,
disp. 2, § 2, n. 26: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Qui ordinate
vult, prius vult finem quam
media ad finem. Sed Deus ordinate
vult. Ergo prius vult finem quam
media ad illum. Atqui gloria est
finis et merita sunt media ad illum
conducentia. Ergo prius vult gloriam
quam merita, et consequenter
electio ad gloriam non potest esse
ex praevisione meritorum.</foreign></q></note> This argument,
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
if it proved anything, would prove the
logical impossibility of conditional predestination.
But it overshoots the mark and consequently
proves nothing at all. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Qui nimium probat, nihil
probat.</foreign>
</p>

<p>
Gonet moreover assumes what he sets out to prove,
namely, that God <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntate antecedente</foreign>
decreed the glory of certain men to the exclusion of others. This
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>petitio principii</foreign> vitiates the entire
polysyllogism. God's will to save is universal. He wills the eternal happiness
of all men <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>antecedenter</foreign>, and the reprobation of
some only <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>consequenter</foreign>; hence eternal
predestination is not absolute, but hypothetical, that is, it depends on merit.
That the divine scheme of grace can take a different
course <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in ordine intentionis</foreign>
from that <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in ordine executionis</foreign>
is a mere fiction. If eternal salvation in the order of
temporal execution is given only as a reward of merit,
it must be a reward of merit also in the order of intention.
In both cases predestination depends upon a future
condition.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps the worst feature of the theory of absolute predestination
is the fact that it involves the absolute reprobation
of those not predestined to glory. <q>If it could
be validly argued,</q> says Gutberlet, <q>that, since the end
must be willed before the means, salvation must be
decreed before the means to its attainment (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> merits),
the argument would be applicable also to the damned.
If God <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntate antecedente</foreign> wills to lead
only a few to salvation, and if this intention must precede every other,
then He must likewise <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntate antecedente</foreign>
have in view the end of the reprobates, which is His own glorification
through the manifestation of His justice and mercy.
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
Hence He must also decree the means necessary to obtain
this end, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> He must cause these unfortunate creatures to
sin, in order that they may reach the end for which He
has predestined them; in other words, He must pre-ordain
them to sin and eternal damnation,</q><note place='foot'>Cfr.
Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmat.
Theol.</hi>, Vol. VIII, p. 330.</note> which is what Calvin
teaches. The advocates of the theory naturally shrink
from adopting such a blasphemous conclusion, and fall
back upon the theory of <emph>negative</emph> reprobation, which, however,
amounts practically to the same thing.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V.</hi>
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_4_Number_2'>Art. 4, No. 2</ref>,
<hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>. The
opposite opinion is defended by
Billuart <hi rend='italic'>De Deo</hi>, diss. 9, art. 4,
§ 3 (ed. Lequette, p. 386).</note>
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Theory of Hypothetical Predestination
post Praevisa Merita.</hi>&mdash;Predestination,
like God's will to save all men, is based
on a hypothetical decree. Those only are predestined
to eternal happiness who shall merit it
as a reward. It is solely by reason of His infallible
foreknowledge of these merits that God's hypothetical
decree of predestination becomes absolute.
Or, as Becanus puts it, <q>God first prepared
the gifts of grace, and then elected to eternal life those whose
good use of the gifts He foresaw.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Orth.
Praed.</hi>, c. 1, n. 7:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus primo praeparavit dona gratiae
ac deinde eos, quos praevidebat
bene usuros eiusmodi donis, elegit
ad vitam aeternam.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
This view, which strongly appeals to us for the reason
that it sets aside the cruel theory of <q>negative reprobation,</q>
was defended by such earlier Scholastics as Alexander
of Hales and Albertus Magnus, and by many eminent
later writers, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> Toletus, Lessius, Frassen, Stapleton,
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
Tournely, and is held to-day by nearly all theologians outside
the Thomist school. What gave it special authority
in modern times was the recommendation of St. Francis de
Sales, who, in a letter to Lessius (Aug. 26, 1618) described the theory of
conditional predestination <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>post praevisa
merita</foreign> as <q>more in harmony with the mercy and grace of God, truer and
more attractive.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... sententiam
illam antiquitate,
suavitate ac Scripturarum
nativâ auctoritate nobilissimam de
praedestinatione ad gloriam post
praevisa merita semper ut Dei misericordiae
ac gratiae magis consentaneam,
veriorem ac amabiliorem existimavi.</foreign></q>
(Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Traité de l'Amour
de Dieu</hi>, III, 5).</note> This view
has a solid basis both in Scripture and Tradition.
</p>

<p>
a) Holy Scripture clearly teaches the universality
of God's saving will. Now if God <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntate
antecedente</foreign> wills the eternal salvation of all
men without exception,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>, pp.
<ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> sqq.</note> He cannot possibly intend
that only some shall be saved.
</p>

<p>
It is further to be noted that the Bible makes not only
the temporal realization but likewise the eternal promise
of glory dependent on the performance of good works. St. Paul, whose Epistle to
the Romans is cited as a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>locus classicus</foreign>
by the advocates of the theory,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_3_No_4'>No. 4</ref>.</note> wrote towards
the end of his life to Timothy: <q>I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith. As to the rest, there is laid up for me a crown
of justice, which the Lord the just judge will render to
me in that day.</q><note place='foot'>2 Tim. IV, 7
sq.: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Bonum
certamen certavi, cursum consummavi,
fidem servavi; in reliquo reposita
est (ἀπόκειται=praeparata ab
aeterno) mihi corona iustitiae, quam
reddet (ἀποδώσει) mihi Dominus
in illa die, iustus index.</foreign></q> Cfr. 1
Cor. IX, 24 sqq.; Apoc. II, 7, 26.</note> In writing these lines the Apostle
no doubt had in mind the sentence of the Universal
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
Judge: <q>Come, ye blessed of my Father, possess you the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world,</q><note place='foot'>Matth. XXV, 34 sqq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Venite,
benedicti Patris mei, possidete
paratum vobis regnum a constitutione
mundi.</foreign></q></note>&mdash;which may with far greater reason be termed
a <q>classical</q> text than the obscure ninth chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans. To prepare for men the kingdom
of heaven from the foundation (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> beginning) of the
world, is to predestine them to eternal happiness. Now,
God has <q>prepared</q> the kingdom of heaven for men in
view of their foreseen merits, that is to say, conditionally. The causal
conjunction <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>enim</foreign> in the sentence following the
one just quoted (Matth. XXVI, 25): <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Esurivi enim et
dedistis mihi manducare</foreign>, etc.,</q> refers to the entire preceding
sentence, not only to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>possidete</foreign> in time,
but also to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>paratum</foreign> in eternity.
Consequently, the eternal decree of predestination itself, like its temporal
execution, depends on good works or merit. This interpretation
of Matth. XXV, 34-36 is confirmed by the
sentence pronounced upon the reprobates, Matth. XXV,
41 sqq.: <q>Depart from me, you cursed, into everlasting
fire, which was prepared for the devil and his angels.
For I was hungry, and you gave me not to eat,
etc.</q> The <q>everlasting fire</q> is manifestly decreed
from all eternity in the same sense in which it is inflicted in
time, namely, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>propter et post praevisa merita</foreign>.
Billuart's contention<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Deo</hi>, ed. Lequette, p.
391.</note> that hell has been prepared solely
for <q>the devil and his angels</q> is untenable, because in
several other Scriptural passages<note place='foot'>For instance, John VIII, 44; 1
John III, 8; Acts XIII, 10.</note> the reprobates are
expressly classed among the followers of Satan. If we
add to this that our Divine Lord, in foretelling the last
judgment, had naturally to formulate his prediction so as
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
not only to show its absolute justice but likewise to intimate
that, had they so willed, the damned might have had
their place on the right hand of the Great Judge, we
must admit that the theory of predestination
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>post praevisa
merita</foreign> has a solid foundation in Scripture.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Inst. Theol.</hi>, Vol.
III, pp. 289 sqq., Paris 1896; Heinrich-Gutberlet,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmat. Theol.</hi>, Vol.
VIII, § 430.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) The Greek Fathers unanimously favor hypothetical
predestination, which fact has caused
the theory to be commonly referred to as <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sententia
Graecorum</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>Lessius,
<hi rend='italic'>Antapol.</hi>, prop. 8:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Tenent hanc sententiam omnes
Patres Graeci, adeo ut communiter
dicatur esse sententia Graecorum.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
Thus St. Chrysostom interprets the judgment of the
Son of Man as follows: <q>Possess ye the kingdom
[of heaven] as your own by heredity, as a paternal
heritage, as a gift long due to you; for it was prepared
and arranged for you before you came into existence,
because I knew beforehand that you would be
what you are.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom. in Matth.</hi>, 80, n. 2:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Haereditate possidete regnum quasi
proprium, quasi paternum et vestrum,
iam olim vobis debitum; priusquam
enim existeretis, haec vobis
parata erant et disposita, quia ego
vos tales futuros esse praescivi.</foreign></q></note>
Theodoret says: <q>He did not simply
predestine [men], but He predestined them because
He foreknew [their merits].</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Rom.</hi>,
VIII, 29 (Migne, <hi rend='italic'>P. G.</hi>, LXXXII, 142):
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non simpliciter
praedestinavit, sed quum
praescivisset, praedestinavit.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
The Latin Fathers before St. Augustine all without
exception taught hypothetical predestination. St.
Hilary says: <q>Many are called, but few are chosen....
Hence election is not a matter of indiscriminate choice,
but a selection based on merit.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Ps.</hi>,
64, n. 5: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Multi vocati
sunt, sed pauci electi.... Itaque
non res indiscreti iudicii est electio,
sed ex meriti delectu facta discretio
est.</foreign></q></note> And St. Ambrose:
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
<q>Therefore the Apostle says: <q>Whom he foreknew he
also predestined</q> (Rom. VIII, 29); for He did not predestine
before He foreknew, but He predestined a reward
to those whose merits He foresaw.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Fide</hi>,
V, 6, 83: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unde et
Apostolus ait: quos praescivit, et
praedestinavit (Rom. VIII, 29); non
enim ante praedestinavit quam praescivit,
sed quorum merita praescivit,
eorum praemia praedestinavit.</foreign></q>
Cfr. Franzelin, <hi rend='italic'>De Deo Uno</hi>, thes.
59; Lessius, <hi rend='italic'>De Praedest. et Reprob.</hi>,
sect. 2, n. 7 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
The question cannot, as Bellarmine contends,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia</hi>, II, 11.</note> be
decided on the sole authority of St. Augustine, because
he is claimed by both parties to the controversy.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
O. Rottmanner, O. S. B.,
<hi rend='italic'>Der Augustinismus</hi>, München 1892;
O. Pfülf, S. J., <q><hi rend='italic'>Zur Prädestinationslehre
des hl. Augustinus</hi></q> in
the Innsbruck <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für kath.
Theologie</hi>, 1893, pp. 483 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
On account of the existing differences of opinion it
is impossible to establish the theory of hypothetical predestination
on the basis of Scholastic teaching.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref> sqq.,
<ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> sqq.</note> The
opinion of St. Thomas is in dispute;<note place='foot'>Cfr. Franzelin,
<hi rend='italic'>De Deo Uno</hi>,
thes. 64.</note> likewise that of
St. Bonaventure. Scotus in his controversy with Henry
of Ghent shows a disposition to favor absolute predestination,
but leaves the question open. <q>Let every
one,</q> he says,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment. in IV Libros Sent.</hi>,
1, dist. 41: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Eligatur [ea sententia]
quae magis placet, dum
tamen salvetur libertas divina sine
aliqua iniustitia et alia quae salvanda
sunt circa Deum.</foreign></q></note> <q>choose whichever opinion suits him
best, without prejudice to the divine liberty, which must be
safeguarded against injustice, and to the other truths
that are to be held in respect of God.</q><note place='foot'>Many Scholastic utterances
bearing on this subject have been
collected by Lessius, <hi rend='italic'>De Praedest. et
Reprob.</hi>, sect. 2, n. 7 (<hi rend='italic'>Opusc.</hi> II,
pp. 208 sqq., Paris 1878).</note>
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='smallcaps'>A Compromise Theory.</hi>&mdash;For the sake of
completeness we will add a few words on a theory
which takes middle ground between the two just
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
reviewed, holding that, while the common run of
humanity is predestined hypothetically, a few
exceptionally favored Saints enjoy the privilege of
absolute predestination.
</p>

<p>
Among the champions of this <q>eclectic</q> theory may be mentioned:
Ockam,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment. in Quatuor Libros Sent.</hi>, 1,
dist. 41, qu. 1.</note> Gabriel Biel,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment.
in Quatuor Libros Sent.</hi>,
1, dist. 41, art. 2.</note> Ysambert,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>S. Theol.</hi>,
1a, qu. 23, disp. 3, art. 4.</note> and
Ambrosius Catharinus.<note place='foot'>In his
treatise <hi rend='italic'>De Praedestinatione</hi>,
dedicated to the Council of
Trent.</note> The Saints regarded by these
writers as absolutely predestined to eternal glory are: the
Blessed Virgin Mary, the prophets and Apostles, St. Joseph,
St. Aloysius, and a few others, as well as all infants
dying in the grace of Baptism. Billuart,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Deo</hi>,
disp. 9, art. 3.</note> Dominicus
Soto, and certain other divines attack this theory on the
ground that it makes the salvation of the great majority
of the elect a matter of chance and thereby imperils the
dogmatic teaching of the Church. This objection is unfounded.
For though the <q>eclectic</q> theory has little or
no support either in Revelation or in reason, it sufficiently
safeguards the dogma of predestination by admitting that
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntate consequente</foreign>
none but the predestined can attain
to eternal beatitude.
</p>

<p>
Only with regard to the Blessed Virgin Mary are we
inclined to make an exception. It is probable that she
was predestined to eternal glory
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ante praevisa merita</foreign>, because,
in the words of Lessius, the privileges she enjoyed
<q>exceed all measure and must not be extended to any
other human being.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Praedest. et Reprob.</hi>, Paris
edition of the <hi rend='italic'>Opuscula</hi>, 1878, p.
412: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... privilegia eius omnem
modum superant et ad nullum alium
sunt extendenda.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Article 4. The Reprobation Of The Damned</head>

<p>
The reprobation of the damned is sometimes called
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedestinatio ad
gehennam</foreign>, though, as we have remarked,
the term <q>predestination</q> should properly be
restricted to the blessed.
</p>

<p>
There can be no absolute and positive predestination
to eternal punishment, and the pains of hell can
be threatened only in view of mortal sin. Hence reprobation
may be defined, in the words of Peter Lombard, as
<q>God's foreknowledge of the wickedness of some creatures and
the preparation of their damnation.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sent.</hi>,
1, dist. 40: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... est
praescientia iniquitatis quorundam
et praeparatio damnationis eorumdem.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
A distinction must, however, be made (at least in theory),
between <emph>positive</emph> and <emph>negative</emph> reprobation. To
teach positive reprobation would be heretical. Negative
reprobation, on the other hand, is defended by all those
Catholic theologians who advocate the theory of absolute
predestination <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ante praevisa
merita</foreign>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_3_No_4'>Art. 3, No. 4</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Heretical Predestinarianism or the
Theory of the Positive Reprobation of the
Damned.</hi>&mdash;Heretical Predestinarianism was
taught by Lucidus, Gottschalk, Wiclif, Hus, the
younger Jansenius, and especially by Calvin.
The latter asserted that the salvation of the elect
and the damnation of the reprobate are the effects
of an unconditional divine decree.<note place='foot'>Calvin's
teaching in his <hi rend='italic'>Inst.</hi>,
l. III, c. 21, 24. On Arminianism
see J. F. Loughlin in the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic
Encyclopedia</hi>, Vol. I, pp. 740 sqq.</note>
</p>

<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>

<p>
According to this abominable heresy, the sin of Adam
and the spiritual ruin which it entailed upon his descendants
are attributable solely to the will of God. God produces
in the reprobate a <q>semblance of faith,</q> only to
make them all the more deserving of damnation. In the
beginning of the seventeenth century Arminius and a few
other theologians of the Dutch Reformed Church, repelled
by Calvin's <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>decretum
horribile</foreign>, ascribed the positive reprobation
of the damned to original sin
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lapsus</foreign>). These
writers, called Infralapsarians or Postlapsarians, were
opposed by the strict school of Calvinist divines under
the leadership of Gomarus. The great Calvinist Synod of
Dordrecht (1618-1619) condemned the principles of Arminius,
and subsequently his adherents were driven from
Holland.
</p>

<p>
The Catholic Church condemned Predestinarianism
as early as 529 at the Second Council of
Orange, which among other things declared:
<q>We not only refuse to believe that some men are
by divine power predestined to evil, but if
there be any who hold such a wicked thing, we condemn them with
utter detestation.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Aliquos
vero ad malum divinâ
potestate praedestinatos esse non
solum non credimus, sed etiam, si
sunt qui tantum malum credere velint,
cum omni detestatione illis
anathema dicimus.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 200.)</note>
</p>

<p>
The Tridentine Council defined against Calvin:
<q>If any one saith that the grace of justification
is attained to only by those who are predestined
unto life, but that all others who are called, are
called indeed, but receive not grace, as being by
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
divine power predestined unto evil; let him be
anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 17:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
iustificationis gratiam nonnisi praedestinatis
ad vitam contingere dixerit,
reliquos vero omnes qui vocantur,
vocari quidem, sed gratiam non accipere,
utpote divinâ potestate praedestinatos
ad malum, anathema sit.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 827.)</note>
</p>

<p>
Calvinism, both supra- and infra-lapsarian, is
easily refuted from Revelation and Tradition.
</p>

<p>
a) It runs counter to all those texts of the
Bible which assert the universality of God's
saving will,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_1'>Art. 1</ref>.</note>
the bestowal of sufficient grace
on all sinners,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_2_Thesis_II'>Art. 2,
Thesis II</ref>.</note> and the divine attribute of holiness.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God: His
Knowability, Essence, and Attributes</hi>,
pp. 251 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
Calvin endeavored to prove his blasphemous doctrine
chiefly from the ninth chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the
Romans.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>, pp.
<ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> sqq.</note> His disciple Beza relied mainly on 1 Pet. II,
7 sq.: <q>But to them that believe not, the stone which
the builders rejected, the same is made the head of the
corner: and a stone of stumbling, and a rock of scandal,
to them who stumble at the word, neither do believe,
whereunto also they are set,</q><note place='foot'>1 Pet. II, 7 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non credentibus
autem [Christus] ... lapis offensionis ...
qui offendunt verbo
nec credunt, in quo (εἰς δ) et positi
sunt.</foreign></q></note> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, according to Beza,
predestined not to believe.<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In
hoc positi, i.e. praedestinati
sunt, ut non credant.</foreign></q></note> But this interpretation is
obviously wrong. For we know from Is. VIII, 14<note place='foot'><q>And
he shall be a sanctification
to you. But for a stone of
stumbling and for a rock of offense
to the two houses of Israel, for a
snare and a ruin to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem.</q></note>
and Matth. XXI, 44,<note place='foot'><q>And whosoever shall fall on
this stone, shall be broken: but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it shall
grind him to powder.</q></note> that those who fall on this stone
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
are ground to powder as a punishment for the sin of unbelief.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Oecumen., <hi rend='italic'>in h. l.</hi>: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ad
quod positi sunt, non dicitur, quasi a
Deo ad hoc essent destinati; nulla
enim causa perditionis ministratur
ab eo, qui omnes homines vult salvos
fieri.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
b) The Fathers, especially those of the East,
are unanimous in upholding the orthodox teaching
of the Church. The only one whom adherents
of Predestinarianism have dared to claim is
St. Augustine.
</p>

<p>
Yet the <q>Doctor of Grace</q> expressly teaches: <q>God
is good, God is just. He can deliver some without
merits because He is good; but He cannot damn any one
without demerits, because He is just.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contr.
Iulian.</hi>, III, 18, 35:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Bonus est Deus, iustus est Deus:
potest aliquos sine bonis meritis liberare,
quia bonus est; non potest
quemquam sine malis meritis damnare,
quia iustus est.</foreign></q></note> St. Prosper re-echoes
this teaching when he says of the reprobates:
<q>Of their own will they went out; of their own will they
fell; and because their fall was foreknown, they were not
predestined. They would, however, be predestined if
they were to return and persevere in holiness; hence God's
predestination is for many the cause of perseverance, for
none the cause of falling away.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Resp.
ad XII Object. Vincent.</hi>:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Voluntate exierunt, voluntate ceciderunt,
et quia praesciti sunt casuri,
non sunt praedestinati; essent autem
praedestinati, si essent reversuri et
in sanctitate remansuri, ac per hoc
praedestinatio Dei multis est causa
standi, nemini est causa labendi.</foreign></q></note> St. Fulgentius expresses
himself in similar language.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ad Monim.</hi>,
l. I. Cfr. Petavius,
<hi rend='italic'>De Deo</hi>, X, 7 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_4_Number_2'/>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Theory of <q>Negative Reprobation.</q></hi>&mdash;Negative
reprobation is defined by its defenders
as an eternal decree by which God excludes
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
from Heaven those not absolutely predestined, in
other words, determines not to save them.
</p>

<p>
a) Gonet explains the difference between negative and
positive reprobation in Scholastic terminology as follows:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... quod haec [i.e. positiva] habet non solum terminum
a quo, nempe exclusionem a gloria, sed etiam terminum ad
quem, scil. poenam sive damni sive sensus; illa vero
[i.e. negativa] solum habet terminum a quo, nempe exclusionem
a gloria ut beneficio indebito, non vero terminum
ad quem, quia ex vi exclusionis ut sic praecise et ut
habet rationem purae negationis, non intelligitur reprobus
esse damnandus aut ulli poenae sive damni sive sensus
deputandus.</foreign></q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Clypeus Thomist.</hi>,
Vol. II, tr. 5,
disp. 5, art. 2, n. 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
The general principle laid down in this quotation is
variously developed by Thomist theologians.
</p>

<p>
The rigorists (Alvarez, John a S. Thoma, Estius, Sylvius)
assign as the motive of reprobation the sovereign
will of God. God, they say, without taking into account possible sins
and demerits, determined <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> to exclude
from Heaven those who are not predestined. De Lemos,
Gotti, Gonet, Gazzaniga, and others condemn this view as
incompatible with the teaching of St. Thomas, and, appealing to
St. Augustine's doctrine of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>massa damnata</foreign>,
find the ultimate reason for the exclusion of the
reprobates from heaven in original sin, in which God,
without being unjust, could leave as many as He saw
fit. Goudin, Graveson, Billuart, and others assume that
the reprobates are not directly excluded from eternal glory
but merely from <q>effective election</q> thereunto, God simply having decreed
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ante praevisa merita</foreign> to leave them to
their weakness.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Limbourg, S. J., in the
Innsbruck <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für kath.
Theologie</hi>, 1879, pp. 203 sqq.</note>
</p>

<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>

<p>
While the Thomists found no difficulty in harmonizing
this view with their theory of physical premotion,
the few Molinists who espoused it were hard put
in trying to square it with the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia
media</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Praedest.</hi>, V,
4 sqq.</note> On the
whole these Molinists endorse the third and mildest
of the above-quoted opinions, which differs only
theoretically from the rigoristic view described in the first
place. Practically it makes no difference whether God
directly excludes a man from heaven or refuses to give
him the graces necessary to attain it.
</p>

<p>
Surveying all three of the theories under consideration
we cannot but regard the first and third as heartless
and cruel, because they attribute eternal reprobation
to a positive decree that takes effect independently of
sin; the second, (which ascribes reprobation to original
sin), is open to the serious dogmatic objection that it contradicts
the teaching of St. Paul and the Tridentine declaration
that <q>there is no condemnation
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>nihil damnationis</foreign>)
in those who are truly buried together with Christ
by baptism into death.</q><note place='foot'> <hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>,
Sess. V, can. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) Negative reprobation is rightly regarded as
the logical counterpart of absolute predestination.<note place='foot'>Which
explains why both theories
have the same defenders. <hi rend='italic'>V.
supra</hi>, <ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_3_No_4'>Art.
3, No. 4</ref>.</note>
If Almighty God, by an absolute decree,
without regard to any possible merits, merely to
reveal His divine attributes and to <q>embellish the
universe,</q> had determined that only those could
enter the <q>Heavenly Jerusalem</q> who were antecedently
predestined thereto, it would inevitably
follow that the unfortunate remainder of humanity
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
by the very same decree were <q>passed over,</q>
<q>omitted,</q> <q>overlooked,</q> <q>not elected,</q> or, as
Gonet honestly admits, <q>excluded from Heaven,</q>
which is the same thing as being negatively condemned
to hell.
</p>

<p>
The logical distinction between positive and negative
reprobation, therefore, consists mainly in this, that the
former signifies absolute damnation to hell, the latter
(equally absolute) non-election to Heaven. To protect
the Catholic champions of negative reprobation against
unjust aspersions, however, it is necessary to point out
certain fundamental differences between their theory and
the heresy of Calvin.
</p>

<p>
Calvin and the Jansenists openly deny the universality
both of God's saving will and of the atonement; they refuse
to admit the actual bestowal of sufficient grace upon
those fore-ordained to eternal damnation; and claim
that the human will loses its freedom under the predominance
of efficacious grace or concupiscence. The Catholic
defenders of negative reprobation indignantly reject
the charge that their position logically leads to any such
heretical implications.
</p>

<p>
c) The theory of negative reprobation can be
sufficiently refuted by showing that it is incompatible
with the universality of God's will to save
all men. For if God willed absolutely and antecedently
to <q>exclude some men from Heaven,</q>
as Gonet asserts, or <q>not to elect them to eternal
glory,</q> as Suarez contends, then it would be His
absolute will that they perish.
</p>

<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>

<p>
α) For one thus negatively reprobated it is metaphysically
impossible to attain eternal salvation. To hold
otherwise would be tantamount to assuming that an
essentially absolute decree of God can be frustrated.
This consideration led certain Thomists<note place='foot'>Bañez,
Alvarez, Gonet.</note> to describe the
divine <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntas salvifica</foreign>
as rather an ineffectual
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>velleitas</foreign>.<note place='foot'><q><foreign
lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus non serio vult, sed vellet
salvare etiam reprobos, nisi per hoc
impediretur pulchritudo universi.</foreign></q></note>
But this conflicts with the obvious teaching of
Revelation.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>, Art.
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_1'>1</ref> and
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_II_Section_3_Article_2'>2</ref>.</note>
Suarez labors in vain to reconcile the sincerity of
God's salvific will with the theory of negative reprobation.
The two are absolutely irreconcilable. How could God
sincerely will the salvation of all men if it were true, as
Suarez says, that <q>it is not in man's power to work out
his eternal salvation in case he falls under non-election,
non-predestination, or, which amounts to the same thing,
negative reprobation</q>?<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Praedest.</hi>,
V, 8, 8: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non
est in potestate hominis, cum non-electione
seu cum non-praedestinatione
aut, quod idem est, cum reprobatione
negativa actu ponere seu
componere suam aeternam salutem.</foreign></q>
Cfr. Franzelin, <hi rend='italic'>De Deo Uno</hi>, p. 583,
3rd ed., Rome 1888.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) The cruel absurdity of the theory of negative
reprobation becomes fully apparent when we consider
the attitude it ascribes to God. Gonet writes: <q>Foreseeing
that the whole human race would be depraved by
original sin, God, in view of the merits of Christ who
was to come, elected some men to glory and, in punishment
of original sin and to show His justice towards
them and His greater mercy towards the elect, permitted
others to miss the attainment of beatitude, in other words,
He positively willed that they should not attain it....
In virtue of this efficacious intention He devised appropriate
means for the attainment of His purpose, and seeing
that some would miss beatitude by simply being left
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
in the state of original sin, and others by being permitted
to fall into actual sins and to persevere therein, He
formally decreed this permission, and finally ... by a
command of His intellect ordained these means towards
the attainment of the aforesaid end.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Deus ex omnibus hominibus,
quos infectos originali peccato praevidit,
efficaciter ex meritis Christi
venturi quosdam elegit ad gloriam,
et alios in poenam eiusdem originalis
peccati et ad ostensionem suae
iustitiae erga illos et maioris misericordiae
erga electos voluit permittere,
ut deficerent a consecutione
gloriae seu positive eis non voluit
gloriam.... Ex vi huius intentionis
efficacis excogitavit media apta
ad consecutionem talis finis, et videns
in aliquibus hominibus esse
aptum medium in solo originali
peccato eos relinquere, in aliis vero
permittere, ut cadant in haec vel
illa peccata actualia ac in illis perseverent,
has permissiones per subsequentem
electionem approbavit.
Et tandem ... per actum imperii
sui intellectus haec media ad praedictum
finem ordinavit.</foreign></q> <hi rend='italic'>Clyp. Thomist.</hi>,
Vol. II, disp. 5, art. 4, n. 155.</note> Translated into
plain every-day language this can only mean that God tries
with all His might to prevent the reprobate from attaining
eternal salvation and sees to it that they die in the
state of sin. Suarez is perfectly right in characterizing Gonet's teaching as
<q>incompatible with sound doctrine.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Reprob.</hi>, c. 3, n. 6.</note>
But his own teaching is equally unsound and
cruel. For he, too, is compelled to assert: <q>Predestination
to glory is the motive for which efficacious or infallible
means towards attaining that end are bestowed.
Hence to refuse to predestine a man for glory is to deny
him the means which are recognized as fit and certain to
attain that end.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Praedest.</hi>,
V, 7, 14: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Electio
ad finem est ratio dandi media
efficacia seu infallibilia ad illum;
ergo negatio illius electionis erit
suo modo ratio non dandi media,
quae cognoscuntur congrua et infallibilia
ad illum finem consequendum.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
Holy Scripture fortunately speaks a different language.
It describes God as a loving Father, who <q>wills not
that any should perish, but that all should return to
penance.</q><note place='foot'>2 Pet. III, 9:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... nolens
aliquos perire, sed omnes ad poenitentiam
reverti.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>

<p>
γ) Practically it makes no difference whether a man is
positively condemned to eternal damnation, as Calvin
and the Jansenists assert, or negatively excluded from
Heaven, as held by the orthodox theologians whom we
have just quoted. The alleged distinction between positive
and negative reprobation is <q>a distinction without a difference.</q>
For an adult to be excluded from Heaven simply
means that he is damned. There is no such thing as a
middle state or a purely natural beatitude. Lessius justly
says that to one reprobated by God it would be all the
same whether his reprobation was positive or negative,
because in either case he would be inevitably
lost.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Praedest.</hi>, sect. 2, n. 13:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Secundum communem aestimationem
hominum paria videntur, Deum
velle ut pereas et nolle te ponere
in electorum suorum numero neque
gratiam congruam et perseverantiam
dare; aeque enim infallibiliter ex
huiusmodi decretis sequeretur damnatio.
Et si alterutrum horum decretorum
esset subeundum, quivis
censeret sibi esse indifferens, utrum
eligatur, quum utrumque ante praevisionem
operum sit conceptum.</foreign></q>
The teaching of St. Augustine
and that of St. Thomas on this
point is in dispute. See Chr. Pesch,
<hi rend='italic'>Praelect. Dogmat.</hi>, Vol. II, 3rd ed.,
pp. 230 sqq., and Heinrich-Gutberlet,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theol.</hi>, Vol. VIII,
§ 433.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Readings</hi>:&mdash;*Ruiz, <hi rend='italic'>De Praedestinatione
et Reprobatione</hi>, Lyons 1628.&mdash;Ramirez, <hi rend='italic'>De Praedestinatione
et Reprobatione</hi>, 2 vols., Alcalá 1702.&mdash;*Lessius, <hi rend='italic'>De
Perfectionibus Moribusque Divinis</hi>, XIV, 2.&mdash;*<hi rend='smallcaps'>Idem</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>De Praedestinatione et Reprobatione</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Opusc.</hi>, Vol. II, Paris 1878).&mdash;Tournely,
<hi rend='italic'>De Deo</hi>, qu. 22 sqq.&mdash;Schrader,
<hi rend='italic'>Commentarii</hi>, I-II, <hi rend='italic'>De Praedestinatione</hi>,
Vienna 1865.&mdash;J. P. Baltzer, <hi rend='italic'>Des hl. Augustinus Lehre über
Prädestination und Reprobation</hi>, Vienna 1871.&mdash;Mannens, <hi rend='italic'>De
Voluntate Dei Salvifica et Praedestinatione</hi>, Louvain 1883.&mdash;O. Rottmanner, O.
S. B., <hi rend='italic'>Der Augustinismus</hi>, München 1892.&mdash;O. Pfülf, S. J.,
<q><hi rend='italic'>Zur Prädestinationslehre des hl. Augustinus</hi>,</q> in the
Innsbruck <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für kath. Theologie</hi>, 1893, pp. 483
sqq.&mdash;B. J. Otten, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>A Manual of the History of Dogmas</hi>,
Vol. I, St. Louis 1917, pp. 281, 378,
382 sqq.
</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Grace In Its Relation To Free-Will</head>

<p>
When we speak of the relation of grace to
free-will, we mean efficacious grace; merely sufficient
grace, as such, does not involve consent.
</p>

<p>
The Protestant reformers and the Jansenists
denied the freedom of the human will under the
influence of efficacious grace.
</p>

<p>
Catholic theologians have always staunchly upheld
both the freedom of the will and the efficacy
of grace, but they disagree in explaining the
mutual relations between grace and free-will.
</p>

<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_III_Section_1'/>
<head>Section 1. The Heresy of The Protestant Reformers And The Jansenists</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Heretical Errors of Luther, Calvin,
and Jansenius Contrasted With the Orthodox
Teaching of the Church.</hi>&mdash;Luther
and Calvin asserted that the freedom of the will
was irretrievably lost by original sin. Jansenius
taught that the will is overcome by efficacious
grace in exactly the same way as it is overpowered
by concupiscence in the absence of grace. Against
both these heresies the Church has always maintained
that the will remains free under the influence
of efficacious grace.
</p>

<p>
a) Luther taught<note place='foot'>In his treatise
<hi rend='italic'>De Servo Arbitrio</hi>.</note> that original sin has so completely
annihilated man's free-will that he resembles a horse compelled
to go in whatever direction it is driven (according
as <q>God or the devil rides him</q>),<note place='foot'>Cfr. Denifle,
<hi rend='italic'>Luther und Luthertum
in der ersten Entwicklung</hi>, Vol.
I, Mainz 1904.</note> and that the grace of
Christ, far from restoring man's liberty, compels him
to act with intestine necessity.
</p>

<p>
Calvin<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Instit. Christ. Religionis</hi>,
l. II.</note> carried this teaching to its logical conclusions
by asserting: (1) that the will of our first parents was
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
free in Paradise, but lost its freedom by original sin; (2)
that we cannot be delivered from the slavery of Satan
except by the grace of Christ, which does not, however,
restore liberty, but simply compels the will to do good;
(3) that, though the will under the influence of grace is
passive, and must needs follow the impulse to which it
is subjected, yet its acts are vital and spontaneous.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Schiffini,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>,
pp. 378 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
Against these heresies the Council of Trent
maintained the existence of free-will both in the
state of original sin<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 291 sqq.</note> and under the influence of
efficacious grace: <q>If any one saith that man's
free-will, moved and excited by God, by assenting
to God exciting and calling, ... cannot refuse
its consent if it would, but that, as something inanimate,
it does nothing whatever and is merely
passive: let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 4:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, liberum hominis arbitrium
a Deo motum et excitatum nihil
cooperari assentiendo Deo vocanti
... neque posse dissentire, si velit,
sed velut inanime quoddam nihil
omnino agere mereque passive se
habere, anathema sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 814.)</note>
</p>

<p>
b) Jansenius differed from Luther and Calvin
mainly in drawing a sharper distinction between
freedom from external constraint (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>libertas a
coactione</foreign>) and freedom from internal compulsion
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>libertas a necessitate</foreign>), and maintaining
that the will, when under the influence of grace, is exempt
from external constraint, though not from interior
compulsion, and that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>libertas a coactione</foreign>
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
is entirely sufficient to gain merit or demerit in
the fallen state.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> (note
5), pp. 295 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Jansenist teaching on the subject of grace may
be outlined as follows: (1) By original sin man lost
the moral liberty which he had enjoyed in Paradise
and became subject to a twofold delectation&mdash;<foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>delectatio coelestis victrix</foreign> and <foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>delectatio terrena sive carnalis
victrix</foreign>. (2) These two delectations are continually
contending for the mastery; the stronger always defeats
the weaker, (3) and the will, unable to offer
resistance, is alternately overpowered now by the one
and then by the other.<note place='foot'>In support of this contention
Jansenius quoted St. Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>In
Gal.</hi>, n. 49: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quod amplius nos
delectat, secundum id operemur
necesse est.</foreign></q></note> (4) In each case the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio coelestis</foreign> is either stronger than
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio terrena</foreign>,
or it is weaker, or it is of equal strength. When it is
stronger, the will is overcome by grace, which in that
case becomes <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>efficax</foreign> or
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>irresistibilis</foreign>. When it is weaker,
the will simply <emph>must</emph> sin, because the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio coelestis</foreign>
is too weak to overcome the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio
terrena</foreign>. The grace given to a man under such conditions is called by the
Jansenists <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia parva sive sufficiens</foreign>.
When the two delectations are equally strong, the will finds itself unable
to come to a definite decision.
</p>

<p>
This false teaching inspired the famous <q>five propositions</q>
of Jansenius, to-wit: (1) Man is unable to keep
some of God's commandments for want of grace;
(2) In the state of fallen nature no one ever resists
interior grace; (3) To merit or demerit in the state of
fallen nature it is sufficient to be free from external
constraint; (4) The Semipelagian heresy consisted in assuming
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
the existence of a grace which man may either
obey or resist; and (5) Christ did not die for all men,
but solely for the predestined.
</p>

<p>
These propositions were condemned as heretical
by Pope Innocent X in his dogmatic Bull
<q><hi rend='italic'>Cum occasione</hi>,</q> of May 31, 1653. All five are
implicitly contained in the second, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: In the
state of fallen nature no one ever resists interior
grace. <q>If it is true that fallen man never resists
interior grace (second proposition), it follows
that a just man who violates a commandment of
God has not had the grace to observe it, that he
therefore transgressed it through inability to fulfil
it (first proposition). If, however, he has
sinned and thus incurred demerit, it is clear that
the liberty of indifference is not a requisite condition
of demerit, and what is said of demerit is
likewise true of its correlative, merit (third
proposition). On the other hand, if grace is
wanting to the just whenever they fall, it is wanting
still more to sinners; it is therefore impossible
to maintain that the death of Jesus Christ assured
to every man the graces necessary for salvation
(fifth proposition). As a further consequence,
the Semipelagians were in error in admitting the
universal distribution of a grace which may be
resisted (fourth proposition).</q><note place='foot'>J.
Forget in the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic Encyclopedia</hi>,
Vol. VIII, pp. 288 sqq.
On Jansenism see Hergenröther,
<hi rend='italic'>Kirchengeschichte</hi>, 4th ed., ed. by J.
P. Kirsch, Vol. III, pp. 386 sqq.,
466 sqq., Freiburg 1909.</note>
</p>

<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Teaching of the Church Proved
from Revelation.</hi>&mdash;Far from favoring the determinism
of the Reformers and of Jansenius, the
Bible and Tradition positively contradict the contention
that free-will is overpowered by grace.
</p>

<p>
a) The operation of grace and the liberty of
the will never appear in Sacred Scripture as mutually
exclusive, but invariably as coöperating factors,
though sometimes the one is emphasized,
and sometimes the other, according to the purpose
the sacred writer happens to have in view.
</p>

<p>
The Council of Trent expressly calls attention to
this:<note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 5: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unde in
sacris literis quum dicitur: <q>Convertimini
ad me et ego convertar ad
vos,</q> libertatis nostrae admonemur;
quum respondemus: <q>Converte nos,
Domine, ad te et convertemur,</q> Dei
nos gratiâ praeveniri confitemur.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 797.) Cfr.
Oswald, <hi rend='italic'>Die Lehre von der Heiligung</hi>,
3rd ed., pp. 186 sq.</note> <q>When it is said in the sacred writings, <q>Turn
ye to me, and I will turn to you,</q><note place='foot'>Zach. I, 3.</note>
we are admonished
of our liberty; and when we answer: <q>Convert us, O
God, to thee, and we shall be converted,</q><note place='foot'>Jer.
XXXI, 21.</note> we confess
that we are forestalled by the grace of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
St. Paul, it is true, asks: <q>Who resisteth his [God's]
will?</q><note place='foot'>Rom. IX, 19: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Voluntati
enim eius quis resistit?</foreign></q></note> But he also admonishes his favorite
disciple Timothy: <q>Exercise thyself unto godliness.</q><note place='foot'>1 Tim.
IV, 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Exerce autem
teipsum (γύμναζε δέ σεαυτόν)
ad pietatem.</foreign></q></note> St.
Stephen testifies that the grace of the Holy Ghost does
not compel the will. <q>You always resist the Holy
Ghost,</q> he tells the Jews; <q>as your fathers did, so do
you also.</q><note place='foot'>Acts VII, 51:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vos semper
Spiritui Sancto resistitis
(ἀντιπίπτετε),
sicut patres vestri, ita et
vos.</foreign></q></note> Our Lord Himself teaches that grace exerts
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
no interior compulsion but invites free coöperation:
<q>If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.</q><note place='foot'>Matth.
XIX, 17: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si autem
vis ad vitam ingredi, serva mandata.</foreign></q>
Cfr. Apoc. IV, 20: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ecce
sto ad ostium et pulso; si quis audierit
vocem meam et aperuerit
mihi ianuam, intrabo ad illum.</foreign></q></note>
The exhortations, promises, and threats uttered
in various portions of Holy Writ would be meaningless
if it were true that grace destroys free-will.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
the Scriptural argument
for the existence of sufficient grace,
<hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) As regards Tradition, the Greek Fathers
who wrote before St. Augustine defended the
freedom of the will so energetically that they
were subsequently accused of harboring Pelagian
and Semipelagian errors.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> sq.</note>
Calvin himself admits
that with but one exception the Fathers are
unanimously opposed to his teaching.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Instit.</hi>,
l. II, c. 3, sect. 10:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Voluntatem movet [gratia Christi],
non qualiter multis saeculis traditum
est et creditum, ut nostrae
postea sit electionis, motioni aut
obtemperare aut refragari, sed illam
efficaciter afficiendo. Illud ergo toties
a Chrysostomo repetitum repudiari
necesse est: <q>Quem trahit, volentem
trahit.</q></foreign></q> Many Patristic
texts of similar tenor have been
gathered and explained by Cardinal
Bellarmine in his treatise <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
et Libero Arbitrio</hi>, VI, 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
The one exception noted is St. Augustine, to whom both
Calvin and Jansenius appeal with great confidence. It
should be noted, however, that the point which chiefly
concerned St. Augustine in his controversies with the
Pelagians and Semipelagians, was the necessity and
gratuity of grace, not its relation to free-will. Where he
incidentally touches upon the latter, he shows by the manner
in which he formulates his sentences that he regards
the relation of grace to free-will as a great mystery. But
he does not try to solve this mystery in the manner in
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
which Alexander the Great cut the Gordian knot. He
does not declare: Grace is everything, free-will is nothing.
If the power of grace destroyed the freedom of the
human will, their mutual relation would be no problem.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Christi</hi>, c. 47:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ista quaestio, ubi de arbitrio voluntatis
et Dei gratia disputatur, ita est
ad discernendum difficilis, ut quando
defenditur liberum arbitrium, negari
Dei gratia videatur; quando autem
asseritur Dei gratia, liberum arbitrium
putetur auferri.</foreign></q></note>
Possibly St. Augustine in the heat of controversy
now and then expressed himself in language open to
misinterpretation, as when he said: <q>Therefore aid was
brought to the infirmity of the human will, so that it
might be unchangeably and invincibly influenced by divine
grace.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Corrept. et Gratia</hi>, XII, 38:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Subventum est infirmitati voluntatis
humanae, ut divinâ gratiâ indeclinabiliter
et insuperabiliter ageretur.</foreign></q></note>
But this and similar phrases admit of a
perfectly orthodox interpretation. As the context shows,
Augustine merely wished to assert the hegemony of
grace in all things pertaining to salvation, and to emphasize
the fact that free-will, strengthened by grace, is
able to resist even the most grievous temptations.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
his <hi rend='italic'>Sermones</hi>, 163, c. 11,
n. 13: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Totum ex Deo, non tamen
quasi dormientes, non quasi ut non
conemur, non quasi ut non velimus.
Sine voluntate tua non erit in te
iustitia Dei. Voluntas quidem non
est nisi tua, iustitia non est nisi
Dei.... Sine te fecit te Deus.
Non enim adhibuisti aliquem consensum,
ut te faceret Deus. Quomodo
consentiebas, qui non eras?
Qui ergo fecit te sine te, non te
iustificat sine te. Ergo fecit nescientem,
iustificat volentem. Tamen
ipse iustificat, ne sit iustitia tua.</foreign></q></note> At
no period of his life did the Saint deny the freedom
of the will under the influence of grace. We will quote
but two out of many available passages in proof of this
statement. <q>To yield consent or to withhold it, whenever God calls, is
the function of one's own will.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Spiritu et Litera</hi>, c. 34:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Consentire vocationi Dei vel ab
ipsa dissentire propriae voluntatis
est.</foreign></q></note>
<q>For the freedom of the will is not destroyed because
the will is aided; but it is aided precisely for the reason
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
that it remains free.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>,
157, 2, 10: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Neque enim
voluntatis arbitrium ideo tollitur,
quia iuvatur; sed ideo iuvatur, quia
non tollitur.</foreign></q> (Migne, <hi rend='italic'>P. L.</hi>,
XXXIII, 677).</note> St. Bernard of Clairvaux
echoes this teaching when, in his own ingenious way, he
summarizes the Catholic dogma as follows: <q>Take
away free will and there will be nothing left to save; take away grace and there
will be no means left of salvation.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
et Libero Arbitrio</hi>, I,
2: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Tolle liberum arbitrium et non
erit, quod salvetur; tolle gratiam et
non erit, unde salvetur.</foreign></q> On other
difficult passages in the writings of
St. Augustine cfr. Mausbach, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Ethik des hl. Augustinus</hi>, Vol. II,
pp. 208 sqq., Freiburg 1909.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Readings</hi>:&mdash;*Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia et
Libero Arbitrio</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Opera Omnia</hi>, ed. Fèvre, Vols. V and VI,
Paris 1873).&mdash;*Dechamps, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>De Haeresi Ianseniana</hi>,
Paris 1645.&mdash;F. Wörter, <hi rend='italic'>Die christliche
Lehre über das Verhältnis von Gnade und Freiheit bis auf
Augustinus</hi>, Freiburg 1856.&mdash;*Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina
Actuali</hi>, thes. 39-48, Gulpen 1885.&mdash;S. Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Divina</hi>, pp. 357 sqq., 377 sqq., Freiburg 1901.&mdash;B. J. Otten, S. J.,
<hi rend='italic'>A Manual of the History of Dogmas</hi>, Vol. II, St. Louis 1918, pp.
507 sqq.
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_I_Chapter_III_Section_2'/>
<head>Section 2. Theological Systems Devised To Harmonize The Dogmas
Of Grace And Free-Will</head>

<p>
The relation of grace to free-will may be regarded
from a twofold point of view. We may
take grace as the primary factor and trace it in
its action on the human will; or, starting from
the latter, we may endeavor to ascertain how free-will
is affected by grace.
</p>

<p>
The first-mentioned method has given birth to two
closely related theological systems, Thomism and Augustinianism;
the latter to Molinism and Congruism, which
are almost identical in substance.
</p>

<p>
Besides these there is a fifth theory, which tries
to reconcile the two extremes and may therefore be called
eclectic.
</p>

<p>
That the human will is free, yet subject to the influence
of grace, is an article of faith unhesitatingly accepted
by all Catholic theologians. It is in trying to explain how
grace and free-will coöperate, that the above-mentioned
schools differ.
</p>

<p>
In approaching this extremely difficult and obscure
problem we consider it our duty to warn the student
against preconceived opinions and to remind him that the
different systems which we are about to examine are all
tolerated by the Church. To-day, when so many more
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
important things are at stake and the faith is viciously
assailed from without, the ancient controversy between
Thomism and Molinism had better be left in abeyance.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Article 1. Thomism And Augustinianism</head>

<p>
Thomism and Augustinianism both hinge on
the concept of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax ab intrinseco s. per
se</foreign>, whereas Molinism and Congruism will not
admit even the existence of such a grace.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Thomistic Theory of Grace.</hi>&mdash;The
true founder of the Thomistic system is not St.
Thomas Aquinas, who is also claimed by the
Molinists, but the learned Dominican theologian
Bañez (1528-1604). His teaching may be
summarized as follows:
</p>

<p>
a) God is the First Cause (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa prima</foreign>)
and Prime Mover (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>motor primus</foreign>) of all things,
and all created or secondary causes (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causae
secundae</foreign>) derive their being and faculties, nay, their very acts from Him. If
any creature could act independently of God, God would
cease to be <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa prima</foreign> and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>motor primus</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Bañez, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S.
Theol.</hi>, 1 p., qu. 14, art. 13:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nulla secunda causa potest operari,
nisi sit efficaciter determinata a
prima.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
The influence of the First Cause is universal, that
is to say, it produces all creatural acts without exception,&mdash;necessary
and free, good and bad,&mdash;because no secondary
cause has power to act unless it is set in motion
by the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>motor primus</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
In influencing His creatures, however, God adapts
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
himself to the peculiar nature of each. The necessary
causes He determines to act necessarily, the free causes,
freely. All receive from Him their substance and their
mode of action.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Billuart, <hi rend='italic'>De Deo</hi>, diss. 8,
art. 4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Movet nempe Deus non
solum ad substantiam actus, sed
etiam ad modum eius, qui est libertas.</foreign></q></note> The rational creature,
therefore, though subject to His determining influence, acts with perfect
freedom, just as if it were not moved.
</p>

<p>
b) In spite of free-will, however, the influence which
God exerts on His rational creatures is irresistible because
it proceeds from an absolute and omnipotent Being
whose decrees brook no opposition. What God wills
infallibly happens.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Alvarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Auxiliis</hi>,
disp. 83, n. 9: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quando agens infinitae
virtutis movet aliquod subiectum,
tale subiectum infallibiliter movetur,
quid tunc resistentia passi non superat
nec adaequat virtutem agentis.
Sed Deus est agens infinitae virtutis.
Ergo motio Dei efficax respectu cuiuscumque
hominis in quibuslibet
circumstantiis positi erit medium
congruum et aptum, ut infallibiliter
inducat effectum, ad quem ex Dei
intentione datur.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless, God is not the author of sin. He moves
the sinner to perform an act; but He does not move
Him to perform a sinful act. The malice of sin derives
solely from the free will of man.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Billuart,
<hi rend='italic'>De Deo</hi>, diss. 8,
art. 5: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Restat ergo tertia sententia,
scilicet Deum praemovere
physice ad entitatem peccati et sic
se effecturum definivisse decreto
positivo et effectivo; operatur enim
omnia secundum consilium voluntatis
suae.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
c) Since the divine influence causally precedes all
creatural acts, God's concurrence with creatural causes
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>concursus generalis</foreign>) must be conceived as
prevenient, not simultaneous. The Divine Omnipotence not only
makes the action possible, but likewise effects it by moving
the will from potentiality to actuality.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 73 sqq.</note> Consequently,
the causal influence which the Creator exerts upon His
creatures is not a mere <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>motio</foreign>, but a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio</foreign>,&mdash;and not
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
merely moral, but physical (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio
physica</foreign>).<note place='foot'>Cfr. De Lemos, <hi rend='italic'>Acta Congr. de
Aux.</hi>, p. 1065: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Illa praepositio
'prae' nihil aliud denotat aut denotare
potest quam Deum esse priorem
et primam causam, prius naturâ et
causalitate moventem, applicantem,
inclinantem et determinantem voluntatem,
quam ipsa voluntas se determinet.</foreign></q></note> It is
by physical premotion that God's prevenient influence
effects the free actions of His creatures, without regard
to their assent.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Gonet, <hi rend='italic'>Clypeus Theol.
Thomist.</hi>, disp. 11, art. 5: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Haec
divina motio in creatura recepta a
Thomistis <q>physica</q> appellatur, ...
quia ex propria essentia et ab intrinseco
est efficax, independenter
a quocumque creato consensu.</foreign></q></note>
Free-will is predetermined by God before
it determines itself.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Graveson, <hi rend='italic'>Epist. Theol.
Polem.</hi>, t. I, ep. 11: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Voluntas
creata priusquam se determinet, a
Deo debet determinari, quia scil.
indifferens sit eaque indifferentia non
solvatur quam per praeviam Dei
motionem.</foreign></q> Cfr. Alvarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Auxiliis</hi>,
disp. 28: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Liberum arbitrium,
quia creatum est, licet determinet
sibi actum, illum tamen
determinat praedeterminatum a
Deo.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
d) If we analyse God's physical predeterminations in
so far as they are created entities, we find that they are
nothing else than the effect and execution of His eternal
decrees, embodied in the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedeterminatio
physica</foreign>. It is the temporal execution of the latter that is called
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio physica</foreign>. Hence we are
justified in speaking, not only of a temporal
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio</foreign>, but of an eternal
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedeterminatio</foreign>,
in fact the terms are often used synonymously.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Reginald.,
<hi rend='italic'>De Novit. Antiquit.
Nominis Praedeterm. Phys.</hi>, l.
II, c. 36: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quum Deus hanc motionem
det causis sciens et volens
atque adeo cum [aeterna] cognitione
et intentione certa cuiusdam determinati
effectus, alias haec essent a
casu respectu Dei: consequitur illam
praemotionem physicam esse praedeterminationem.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
Viewed in its relation to rational creatures, this eternal
predetermination is nothing but a temporal premotion
of the free will to determine itself. Since God has
from all eternity made absolute and conditional decrees,
which possess the power of physical predetermination
without regard to the free consent of His creatures, physical
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
predetermination constitutes an infallible medium
by which He can foreknow their future free actions,
and hence there is no need of a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia
media</foreign>. If God
knows His own will, He must also know the free determinations
included therein. To deny this would be
to destroy the very foundation of His foreknowledge.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Nazarius,
<hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S.
Theol. S. Thom.</hi>, 1 p., qu. 22, art.
4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sublatâ a Deo physicae praemotionis
efficacitate nulla relinquitur
alia in Deo sufficiens causalitas respectu
determinationis liberorum
actuum et consequenter neque in
Deo esse poterit talium praescientia
futurorum.</foreign></q> See also Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God: His Knowability, Essence, and
Attributes</hi>, pp. 383 sqq., 400 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
This is merely the philosophical basis of the Thomistic
system. Its champions carry the argument into the
theological domain by reasoning as follows: What is
true in the natural must be equally true in the supernatural
sphere, as we know from reason and Revelation.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Contenson,
<hi rend='italic'>Theol. Mentis
et Cordis</hi>, l. VIII, diss. 2, specul.
3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Generalem praemotionem ideo
solum adstruimus, ut per eam ad
gratiam per se efficacem uberius
fortiusque stabiliendam viam muniamus
ad eamque propugnandam
serviat etiam philosophia.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
e) To physical predetermination or premotion in the
order of nature, there corresponds in the supernatural
sphere the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax</foreign>, which
predetermines man to perform salutary acts in such wise that he acts freely but
at the same time with metaphysical necessity
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitate consequentiae</foreign>, not
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>consequentis</foreign>). It would be a contradiction
to say that efficacious grace given for the purpose
of eliciting consent may co-exist with non-consent,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, may fail to elicit consent.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Alvarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Auxiliis</hi>, disp.
92, n. 6: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Repugnant ad invicem
auxilium efficax ad consentiendum
et actualis dissensus.</foreign></q></note> The will freely assents
to the divine impulse because it is effectively moved
thereto by grace. Consequently, efficacious grace does
not derive its efficacy from the consent of the will; it is
efficacious of itself and intrinsically
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax ab
intrinseco sive per se</foreign>).<note place='foot'>Cfr. Alvarez,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, disp. 122,
n. 16: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Efficacia auxilii praevenientis
gratiae et connexio eius infallibilis
cum libera cooperatione arbitrii
tota fundatur et desumitur,
tamquam ex prima radice, ex omnipotentia
Dei atque ex absoluto et
efficaci decreto voluntatis eius volentis,
ut homo quem movet convertatur
et pie operetur, nec huiusmodi
efficacia ullo modo dependet etiam,
tamquam a conditione sine qua non,
ex futura cooperatione arbitrii
creati.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>

<p>
It follows that efficacious grace must be conceived as
a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedeterminatio ad
unum</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Alvarez,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, disp. 19,
n. 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Praedictum auxilium actuale
determinat liberum arbitrium
ad unam numero actionem, non
subditur libero arbitrio quantum ad
usum.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
f) If efficacious grace is intrinsically and of its very
nature inseparably bound up with the consent of the
will, it must differ essentially from merely sufficient
grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia mere sufficiens</foreign>), which
confers only the power to act (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>posse
operari</foreign>), not the act itself (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actu
operari</foreign>). Efficacious grace, by its very definition, includes
the free consent of the will, while merely sufficient
grace lacks that consent, because with it, it would
cease to be merely sufficient and would become efficacious.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Graveson, <hi rend='italic'>Epist. Theol.
Polem.</hi>, t. I, ep. 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia
thomistice sufficiens ita ex naturâ
sua essentialiter distinguitur a gratia
thomistice efficaci, ut numquam et in
nullo casu gratia thomistice sufficiens
evadere possit gratia efficax
thomistice nec umquam ponatur
actus secundus, nisi accesserit gratia
efficax thomistice.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
Here the question naturally arises: How, in this hypothesis,
can sufficient grace be called truly sufficient?
The Thomists answer this question in different ways.
Gazzaniga says that sufficient grace confers the power
to perform a good deed, but that something more is required
for the deed itself.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Prael. Theol.</hi>,
disp. 5, c. 6:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In gratia sufficiente totum id continetur
quod ad potentiam bene
operandi exigitur, non autem totum
id quod ulterius requiritur ad
actum; certum est enim in omni
causa agente aliquid plus ad actum
quam ad potentiam requiri.</foreign></q></note> De Lemos ascribes the inefficacy
of merely sufficient grace to a defect of the
will.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panoplia</hi>, t. IV, p. 2, tr. 3, c. 2:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Auxilium sufficiens ita sufficientiam
tribuit ad operandum, si homo velit,
quod defectus operationis nullo
modo provenit ex insufficientia
aliqua ipsius auxilii, sed tantum
ex defectu arbitrii, quod ei resistit
et impedimentum ponit.</foreign></q></note>
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
If the will did not resist, God would promptly add
efficacious grace.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Limbourg, S. J.,
<q><hi rend='italic'>Selbstzeichnung
der thomistischen Gnadenlehre</hi></q>
in the Innsbruck <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für kath. Theologie</hi>, 1877.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Critical Estimate of the Thomistic
Theory.</hi>&mdash;The Thomistic system undoubtedly has
its merits. It is logical in its deductions, exalts
divine grace as the prime factor in the business of
salvation, and magnificently works out the concept
of God as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa prima</foreign>
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>motor primus</foreign>
both in the natural and the supernatural order.
</p>

<p>
But Thomism also has its weak points.
</p>

<p>
A. The Thomistic conception of efficacious
grace is open to two serious theological difficulties.
</p>

<p>
(1) To draw an intrinsic and substantial distinction
between efficacious and merely sufficient
grace destroys the true notion of sufficient grace.
</p>

<p>
(2) The Thomistic theory of efficacious grace
is incompatible with the dogma of free-will.
</p>

<p>
Though in theory the Thomists defend the
sufficiency of grace and the freedom of the will
as valiantly as their opponents, they fail in their
attempts at squaring these dogmas with the
fundamental principles of their system.
</p>

<p>
a) Sufficient grace, as conceived by the Thomists,
is not truly sufficient to enable a man to perform
a salutary act, because <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex vi
notionis</foreign> it confers
merely the power to act, postulating for
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
the act itself a substantially new grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
efficax</foreign>). A grace which requires to be entitatively
supplemented by another, in order to enable
a man to perform a salutary act, is clearly not
sufficient for the performance of that act. <q>To be
truly sufficient for something</q> and <q>to require to
be complemented by something else</q> are mutually
exclusive notions, and hence <q>sufficient
grace</q> as conceived by Thomists is in reality insufficient.
</p>

<p>
Many subtle explanations have been devised to obviate
this difficulty. Billuart and nearly all the later Thomists
say that if any one who has received sufficient grace (in
the Thomistic sense of the term) is denied the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
efficax</foreign>, it must be attributed to a sinful resistance of the
will.<note place='foot'>Billuart, <hi rend='italic'>De Deo</hi>, diss. 8, art.
4. § 3.</note> But this explanation is incompatible with the
Thomistic teaching that together with the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
sufficiens</foreign> there co-exists in the soul of the sinner an irresistible
and inevitable <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio physica</foreign> to the
entity of sin, with which entity formal sin is inseparably bound
up.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Bañez, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S.
Theol. S. Thom.</hi>, 1 p., qu. 14, art.
13, concl. 14: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nam voluntas
creata infallibiliter deficiet circa
quamcumque materiam virtutis, nisi
efficaciter determinetur a divina
voluntate ad bene operandum.</foreign></q></note> If this be true, how can the will of
man be held responsible so long as God denies him the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia ab intrinseco efficax</foreign>?
</p>

<p>
Speaking in the abstract, the will may assume one of
three distinct attitudes toward sufficient grace. It may
consent, it may resist, or it may remain neutral. It cannot
consent except with the aid of a predetermining
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax</foreign>, to merit which is beyond its
power. If it withstands, it <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>eo ipso</foreign> renders
itself unworthy of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
efficax</foreign>. If it takes a neutral attitude, (which may in
itself be a sinful act), and awaits efficacious grace, of
what use is sufficient grace?
</p>

<p>
To resist sufficient grace involves an abuse of liberty.
Now, where does the right use of liberty come in? If coöperation
with sufficient grace moves God to bestow the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia per se efficax</foreign>, as the Thomists
contend, then the right use of liberty must lie somewhere between the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia sufficiens</foreign> and the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax per se</foreign>. But there is absolutely
no place for it in the Thomistic system. The
right use of liberty for the purpose of obtaining efficacious
grace is attributable either to grace or to unaided nature.
To assert that it is the work of unaided nature
would lead to Semipelagianism. To hold that it is owing
to grace would be moving in a vicious circle, thus: <q>Because
the will offers no resistance, it is efficaciously moved
to perform a salutary act; that it offers no sinful resistance
is owing to the fact that it is efficaciously moved to perform
a salutary act.</q><note place='foot'>Other evasions are treated by
Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 400
sqq. On the true notion of merely
sufficient grace, <hi rend='italic'>v.</hi>
<ref target='Part_I_Chapter_I_Section_2_No_6'>Ch. I, Sect. 2, No. 6</ref>,
<hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is impossible to devise any satisfactory solution of
this difficulty which will not at the same time upset the
very foundation on which the Thomistic system rests,
viz.: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nulla secunda
causa potest operari, nisi sit efficaciter
determinata a prima [scil. per applicationem potentiae
ad actum]</foreign>,</q> that is to say, no secondary cause can
act unless it be efficaciously determined by the First Cause
by an application of the latter to the former as of potency
to act.
</p>

<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>

<p>
b) The Thomistic <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax</foreign>, conceived as
a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedeterminatio ad unum</foreign>, inevitably
destroys free-will.
</p>

<p>
α) It is important to state the question clearly: Not
physical premotion as such,<note place='foot'>The Molinists also regard supernatural
grace as a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio
physica</foreign>; cfr. Chr. Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelect.
Dogmat.</hi>, Vol. V, 3rd ed., pp. 145
sq., Freiburg 1908.</note> but the implied connotation
of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praevia determinatio ad unum</foreign>, is
incompatible with the dogma of free-will. The freedom of the will does
not consist in the pure contingency of an act, or in a
merely passive indifference, but in active indifference
either to will or not to will, to will thus or otherwise.
Consequently every physical predetermination, in so far
as it is a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>determinatio ad unum</foreign>, must
necessarily be destructive of free-will. Self-determination and physical
predetermination by an extraneous will are mutually exclusive.
Now the Thomists hold that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia per se
efficax</foreign> operates in the manner of a supernatural
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedeterminatio
ad unum</foreign>. If this were true, the will under the
influence of efficacious grace would no longer be free.
</p>

<p>
To perceive the full force of this argument it is necessary
to keep in mind the Thomistic definition of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio
physica</foreign> as <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actio Dei, quâ voluntatem
humanam, priusquam se determinet, ita ad actum movet insuperabili
virtute, ut voluntas nequeat omissionem sui actus
cum illa praemotione coniungere</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>Gonet,
<hi rend='italic'>Clypeus Theol. Thomist.</hi>,
disp. 9, art 5, § 3.</note> That is to say:
As the non-performance of an act by the will is owing
simply and solely to the absence of the respective
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio
physica</foreign>, so conversely, the performance of an act
is conditioned simply and solely by the presence of a divine
premotion; the will itself can neither obtain nor prevent
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
such a premotion, because this would require a new premotion,
which again depends entirely on the divine pleasure.
If the will of man were thus inevitably predetermined
by God, it could not in any sense of the term be
called truly free.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
β) The Thomists meet this argument with mere evasions.
They make a distinction between <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas
consequentis</foreign> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>antecedens</foreign>), which
really necessitates, and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas
consequentiae</foreign> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>subsequens</foreign>), which
does not. A free act, they say, necessarily proceeds from a physical
premotion, but it is not on that account in itself
necessary. But, we answer, a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>determinatio ad
unum</foreign>, which precedes a free act and is independent of the will, is
more than a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas consequentiae</foreign>&mdash;it
is a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas
consequentis</foreign> destructive of free-will. The Thomists
reply: Considered as a created entity, physical premotion
may indeed be incompatible with free-will; not
so if regarded as an act of God, who, being almighty, is
able to predetermine the will without prejudice to its
freedom.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Alvarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Auxiliis</hi>, disp.
22, n. 39: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Solus Deus propter
suam infinitatem et omnipotentiam,
quia est auctor voluntatis creatae,
potest illam immutare conformiter
ad suam naturam et movere efficaciter
atque applicare ad producendum
actum in particulari, non solum
secundum substantiam, sed etiam
secundum modum libertatis, quod
tamen non potest alia causa creata.</foreign></q></note> The obvious rejoinder is that
an intrinsic contradiction cannot be solved by an appeal to the divine
omnipotence, because even God Himself cannot do what
is intrinsically impossible.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God: His
Knowability, Essence, and Attributes</hi>,
pp. 282 sqq.</note> He can no more change a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>determinatio ad unum</foreign> into a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>libertas ad utrumque</foreign> than
He can create a square circle, because the two notions
involve an intrinsic contradiction. Furthermore, if the
Almighty wished intrinsically to compel a man to perform
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
some definite act, would He not choose precisely that
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio physica</foreign> which, the Thomists claim,
also produces free acts? Not so, replies Alvarez; <q>for the will
remains free so long as the intellect represents to it an
object as indifferent.</q><note place='foot'>Alvarez,
<hi rend='italic'>De Auxiliis</hi>, disp. 22,
n. 19: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nam tamdiu manet libertas
in voluntate, quamdiu intellectus
illi repraesentat obiectum cum
indifferentia.</foreign></q></note> That is to say: Liberty remains
as long as its root, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> an indifferent judgment, is present.
But this new rejoinder, far from solving the riddle,
simply begs the question. Liberty of choice resides
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>formaliter</foreign> in the will, not in the intellect,
and consequently the will, as will, cannot be truly free unless it
possesses within itself the unimpeded power to act or not to act.
This <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>indifferentia activa ad utrumlibet</foreign>,
as it is technically termed, is absolutely incompatible with the
Thomistic <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio ad unum</foreign>. What
would it avail the will to enjoy the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>indifferentia
iudicii</foreign> if it had to submit
to compulsion from some other quarter?
</p>

<p>
γ) To escape from this quandary the Thomists resort
to the famous distinction between the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sensus
compositus</foreign> and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sensus divisus</foreign>.
The Molinists argue: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Liberum
arbitrium efficaciter praemotum a gratia non potest
dissentire; ergo non est liberum.</foreign></q> The Thomists reply:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Distinguo:&mdash;non potest dissentire in sensu
diviso, nego; non potest dissentire in sensu composito,
concedo.</foreign></q> They explain this distinction by certain well-known
examples taken from dialectics. Thus Billuart
says: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ut si dicas, sedens potest stare, significat in
sensu composito, quod possit sedere simul et stare; ...
in sensu diviso, quod sedens sub sessione retinet potentiam
standi, non tamen componendi stationem cum
sessione. Uno verbo: sensus compositus importat potentiam
simultaneitatis, sensus divisus simultaneitatem
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
potentiae.</foreign></q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Deo</hi>,
diss. 8, art. 4, § 2.</note> As one who sits cannot at the same time
stand (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sensus compositus</foreign>), although he
is free to rise (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sensus divisus</foreign>),
so the consent of the will effected by efficacious grace, cannot become dissent
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sensus compositus</foreign>),
though the will retains the power to dissent instead
of consenting (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sensus divisus</foreign>),
and this is sufficient to safeguard its freedom.
</p>

<p>
Is the distinction between <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sensus compositus</foreign>
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sensus divisus</foreign> correctly applied here? Can
the will, under the predetermining influence of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax</foreign>,
change its consent into dissent at any time and as easily
as a man who is sitting on a chair can rise and thereby
demonstrate that his sitting was an absolutely free act?
Alvarez<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Auxiliis</hi>, disp. 92, n. 11:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Etiam posito auxilio efficaci in
voluntate componitur cum illo potentia
ad dissentiendum, quamvis
nulla sit potentia ad coniungendum
actualem dissensum cum auxilio
efficaci</foreign>
[not: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cum actuali consensu</foreign>].</q>]</note>
describes the Thomistic <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentia dissentiendi</foreign>
as a faculty which can never under any circumstances become
active. But such a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentia</foreign> is really no
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentia</foreign> at
all. A man tied to a chair is not free to stand; his natural
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentia standi</foreign>
is neutralized by external restraint.
Similarly, the will, under the influence of the Thomistic
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax</foreign>,
no longer enjoys the power to dissent,
and the alleged <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentia resistendi</foreign>,
by which the Thomists
claim to save free-will, is a chimera.
</p>

<p>
δ) It is at this decisive point in the controversy that
the Molinists triumphantly bring in the declaration of the
Council of Trent that <q>man ... while he receives that
inspiration [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> efficacious grace], ... is also able
to reject it.</q> And again: <q>If any one saith that man's
free-will, moved and excited by God, by assenting to
God exciting and calling, does in no wise coöperate towards
disposing and preparing itself for obtaining the
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
grace of justification; that it cannot refuse its consent
if it would, but that, as something inanimate, it does
nothing whatever and is merely passive; let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess.
VI, cap. 5: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Homo ...
inspirationem illam [gratiam efficacem]
recipiens ... illam et abiicere
potest.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
797). Sess. VI, can. 4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si
quis dixerit, liberum hominis arbitrium
a Deo motum et excitatum
nihil cooperari assentiendo Deo excitanti
atque vocanti, quo ad obtinendam
iustificationis gratiam se disponat
ac praeparet, neque posse dissentire,
si velit, sed velut inanime
quoddam nihil omnino agere mereque
passive se habere, anathema sit.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 814.)</note>
To adjust their system to this important
dogmatic decision, the older Thomists claimed that the
Tridentine Council had in mind merely the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia sufficiens</foreign>,
to which the will can refuse its consent. But this
interpretation is untenable. The Council plainly refers
to that grace with which the will coöperates by giving
its consent (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cooperatur
assentiendo</foreign>) and which it can
render inefficacious by withdrawing its consent, in other
words, with the grace which disposes and prepares a sinner
for justification, and under the influence of which,
according to Luther and Calvin, the will remains inanimate
and merely passive. This can only be the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
efficax</foreign>. Other Thomist theologians, not daring to contradict
the obvious sense of the Tridentine decree, assert that
the Council intentionally chose the term
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>dissentire</foreign>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sensus
divisus</foreign>) rather than <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>resistere</foreign>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sensus compositus</foreign>), in
order to indicate that under the predetermining influence
of grace it is possible for the will to refuse its consent
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>posse dissentire</foreign>)
but not to offer resistance (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>posse
resistere</foreign>).<note place='foot'>Thus Alvarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Auxiliis</hi>,
disp. 93, art. 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nunc autem
dicimus Concilium Tridentinum ...
numquam usum fuisse verbo illo
<q>resistere,</q> sed verbo <q>dissentire</q>
et <q>[abiicere],</q> ut insinuaret non esse
idem formaliter resistere seu posse
resistere auxilio efficaci et posse dissentire
seu abiicere gratiam vocationis....
Unde licet arbitrium
motum auxilio efficaci ad consentiendum possit dissentire, si velit,
non tamen potest Deo resistere vel
auxilio eius efficaci, secundum quod
est instrumentum voluntatis divinae.</foreign></q></note>
This interpretation is no longer tenable
since the Vatican Council has defined that <q>Faith, even
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
when it does not work by charity, is in itself a gift
of God, and the act of faith is a work appertaining to
salvation, by which man yields voluntary obedience to
God Himself, by assenting to and coöperating with His
grace, which he is able to resist.</q><note place='foot'>Sess.
III, cap. 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quare
fides ipsa in se, etiamsi per caritatem
non operetur, donum Dei est
et actus eius est opus ad salutem
pertinens, quo homo liberam praestet
ipsi Deo obedientiam, gratiae
eius cui resistere possit consentiendo
et cooperando.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1791.)</note> If efficacious grace
can be successfully resisted, it can not possess that <q>irresistible</q>
influence which the Thomists ascribe to it.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Tepe,
<hi rend='italic'>Instit. Theol.</hi>, Vol.
III, pp. 74 sqq., Paris 1896; Chr.
Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelect. Dogmat.</hi>, Vol. V,
3rd ed., pp. 140 sqq., Freiburg 1908;
Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 405
sqq., Freiburg 1901. On the teaching
of St. Augustine see Palmieri,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>, thes. 50;
on that of St. Thomas, L. de San,
S. J., <hi rend='italic'>De Deo Uno</hi>, t. I: <hi rend='italic'>De Mente
S. Thomae circa Praedeterminationes
Physicas</hi>, Louvain 1894.</note>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
B. The Thomistic system is open to two serious
objections also from the philosophical point
of view. One of these concerns the medium by
which God foreknows the future free acts of His
rational creatures; the other, His relation to sin.
</p>

<p>
a) In regard to the first-mentioned point we
do not, of course, underestimate the immense
difficulties involved in the problem of God's foreknowledge
of the free acts of the future.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The Molinistic theory also has its difficulties, and they
are so numerous and weighty that in our treatise on
God<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God: His
Knowability, Essence, and Attributes</hi>,
pp. 383 sqq., 400 sqq.</note> we made
no attempt to demonstrate the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia
media</foreign> by stringent arguments, but merely accepted it as
a working hypothesis which supplies some sort of
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
scientific basis for the dogmas of divine omnipotence and
free-will in both the natural and the supernatural order.
</p>

<p>
b) A more serious objection than the one
just adverted to is that the Thomistic hypothesis
involves the blasphemous inference that God
predetermines men to sin.
</p>

<p>
α) Under a rigorous application of the Thomistic principles
God would have to be acknowledged as the cause
of sin. As the predetermination of the will to justification
can take no other form than the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia per se efficax</foreign>,
so sin, considered as an act, necessarily postulates the
predetermining influence of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>motor
primus</foreign>.<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quidquid
entitatis reperitur in
quocumque actu peccati, etiamsi alias
sit intrinsece malus, debet reduci in
Deum tamquam in primam causam
praemoventem et praedeterminantem
actuali motione voluntatem creatam
ad talem actum, inquantum actus est,
secundum quod est ens.</foreign></q> Alvarez,
<hi rend='italic'>De Auxil.</hi>, disp. 24, n. 15.</note> Without
this assumption it would be impossible in the Thomistic
system to find in the absolute will of God an infallible
medium by which He can foreknow future sins.
Bañez says on this point: <q>God knows sin with an intuitive
knowledge, because His will is the cause of the
sinful act, as act, at the same time permitting free-will
to concur in that act by failing to observe the law.</q><note place='foot'>Cfr. Bañez,
<hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S.
Theol. S. Thom.</hi>, 1 p., qu. 23, art.
3, dub. 2, conclus. 2: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus cognoscit
cognitione intuitivâ peccatum
quatenus Dei voluntas est causa entitatis
actus peccati et simul permittens,
quod ad eundem actum
concurrat liberum arbitrium deficiendo
a regula.</foreign></q></note>
Though the Thomists refuse to admit that God Himself
is the immediate author of sin, the conclusion is inevitable
from their premises. And this for two reasons. First,
because the alleged <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio ad malum</foreign> is
as irresistible as the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio ad bonum</foreign>;
and secondly, because the material element of sin must be inseparable from its formal
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
element; otherwise God would foreknow sin merely
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>materialiter</foreign>
as an act but not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>formaliter</foreign> as a sin. The
teaching of the Church on this point was clearly defined
by the Council of Trent: <q>If any one saith that it is
not in man's power to make his ways evil, but that the
works that are evil God worketh as well as those that
are good, not permissibly only, but properly and of Himself,
in such wise that the treason of Judas is no less
His own proper work than the vocation of Paul; let him
be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 6. Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God: His Knowability, Essence,
and Attributes</hi>, pp. 253 sqq.,
442 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
If the rational creature were compelled to perform
a sinful act, as act, resistance would be impossible. And
if it were true that the malice of an act practically cannot
be separated from its physical entity, then in the Thomistic
hypothesis God would be the author not only of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>entitas</foreign>
but likewise of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>malitia peccati</foreign>. The devil
tempts us only by moral means, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> by suggestion; are
we to assume that God tempts us physically by inducing
sin as an act and simultaneously withholding the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio
ad bonum</foreign>, thus making sin an inevitable fatality?
This consideration may be supplemented by another.
So-called <q>sins of malice</q> are comparatively rare.
Most sins are committed for the sake of some pleasure
or imaginary advantage. It is for this reason that moral
theology in forbidding sin forbids its physical entity.
How gladly would not those who are addicted to impurity,
for instance, separate the malice from the entity of their
sinful acts, in order to be enabled to indulge their passion
without offending God!
</p>

<p>
β) Against the logic of this argument some Thomist
theologians defend themselves by a simile. The soul of a
lame man, they say, enables him indeed to move his disabled
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
limb; however, the cause of limping is not the soul
but a crooked shinbone. Father Pesch wittily disposes
of such reasoning as follows: <q>The will of Adam before
the fall was not a crooked shinbone, but it was absolutely straight, and became crooked
through physical premotion.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la'
rend='italic'>Voluntas Adami ante peccatum
non erat tibia curva, sed omnino
recta, facta autem est curva ex promotione
physica.</foreign></q> <hi rend='italic'>Praelect. Dogmat.</hi>,
Vol. II, 3rd ed., p. 137.</note>
</p>

<p>
Another and more plausible contention of the Thomist
school is that Molinism, too, is compelled to ascribe sin
somehow to God. <q>It is impossible for a man to sin
unless God lends His coöperation. Do not, therefore,
the Molinists also make God the author of sin?</q> Those
who argue in this wise overlook the fact that there is a
very large distinction between the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>concursus simultaneus</foreign>
of the Molinists and the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio physica</foreign> of the Thomists.
The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio physica</foreign> predetermines the sinful
act without regard to the circumstance whether or not the
will is able to offer resistance. The
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>concursus simultaneus</foreign>,
on the other hand, begins as a mere <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>concursus
oblatus</foreign>, which is in itself indifferent and awaits as it were
the free consent of the will before it coöperates with the
sinner as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>concursus collatus</foreign>
in the performance of the sinful
act.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 72 sqq.</note> For this reason the distinction between
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actus</foreign> and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>malitia</foreign> has a well-defined place in the
Molinistic system, whereas it is meaningless in that of the
Thomists.<note place='foot'>Cfr. on this subject Palmieri,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>, thes. 41;
T. Papagni, O. P., <hi rend='italic'>La Mente di S.
Tommaso intorno alla Mozione Divina
nelle Creature</hi>, p. 44, Benevento
1901.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Augustinianism</hi>.&mdash;This system, so called
because its defenders pretend to base it on the
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
authority of St. Augustine, has some points of
similarity with Thomism but differs from the
latter in more than one respect, especially in this
that the Augustinians,<note place='foot'>The principal representatives of
Augustinianism are Berti, Bellelli,
and Bertieri.</note> though they speak with
great deference of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia per se efficax</foreign>,
hold that the will is not physically but only morally
predetermined in its free acts. Hence Augustinianism
may fitly be described as the system of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedeterminatio moralis</foreign>. Its most eminent
defender is Lawrence Berti, O. S. A. (1696-1766),
who in a voluminous work <hi rend='italic'>De Theologicis
Disciplinis</hi><note place='foot'>Published at Rome in 1739 sqq.</note>
so vigorously championed the Augustinian
theory that Archbishop Jean d'Yse de Saléon,
of Vienne,<note place='foot'>Cfr. his work <hi rend='italic'>Le Bajanisme
et le Jansénisme Resuscités dans les
Livres de Bellelli et Berti, s. l.</hi>,
1745.</note> and other contemporary theologians
combated his teaching as a revival of Jansenism.
Pope Benedict XIV instituted an official investigation,
which resulted in a decree permitting
Augustinianism to be freely held and taught.
</p>

<p>
a) Whereas Thomism begins with the concept of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa
prima</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>motor primus</foreign>,
Augustinianism is based on the notion of
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio coelestis</foreign> or
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caritas</foreign>. Berti holds
three principles in common with Jansenius: (1) Actual
grace consists essentially in the infusion of celestial
delectation. (2) This heavenly delectation (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
grace) causally precedes free-will in such wise that its
relative intensity in every instance constitutes the law
and standard of the will's disposition to do good.
</p>

<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>

<p>
(3) Simultaneously with this celestial delectation, concupiscence
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio carnalis, concupiscentia</foreign>)
is doing its work in fallen man, and the two powers constantly contend
for the mastery. So long as celestial delectation
(<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> grace) is weaker than, or equipollent with, concupiscence,
the will inevitably fails to perform the salutary
act to which it is invited by the former. It is
only when the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio coelestis</foreign>
overcomes concupiscence
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio coelestis victrix</foreign>)
that free-will can perform
the act inspired by grace. There is a fourth principle,
and one, too, of fundamental importance, which
brings out the essential difference between Augustinianism
and Jansenism, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio coelestis</foreign> never
overpowers the will but leaves it free to choose between
good and evil.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>,
pp. 419 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) The relation between merely sufficient and efficacious
grace in the Augustinian system, therefore, may be
described as follows: Merely sufficient grace imparts to
the will the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>posse</foreign>
but not the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>velle</foreign>, or at best only such
a weak <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>velle</foreign> that it requires the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio victrix</foreign>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax</foreign>)
to become effective. Efficacious grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio
coelestis victrix</foreign>), on the other hand, impels the will actually
to perform the good deed. Hence there is between
the two an essential and specific difference, and the
efficacy of that grace which leads to the performance of
salutary acts does not lie with free-will but depends on the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio coelestis</foreign>, which must consequently
be conceived as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax ab
intrinseco sive per se</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Berti,
<hi rend='italic'>De Theol. Disciplinis</hi>,
XIV, 9, n. 6: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sententia
est Thomistarum et Augustinensium
omnium affirmantium, gratiam efficacem
esse se ipsâ, non talem reddi
aut cooperatione liberi arbitrii aut
ex circumstantiis congruis, utque
certissime et infallibiliter cum effectu
coniunctam esse.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
c) Nevertheless, the necessity of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
efficax ab
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
intrinseco</foreign>, according to the Augustinian theory, is not
due to the subordination of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa secunda</foreign>
to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa prima</foreign>, as the Thomists contend,
but to a constitutional
weakness of human nature, consisting in this
that its evil impulses can be overcome solely by the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio coelestis victrix</foreign>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax, adiutorium
quo</foreign>. The case was different before the Fall, when
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia versatilis</foreign>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia sufficiens, adiutorium sine
quo non</foreign>) sufficed for the performance of salutary
acts.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Berti, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, XIV, 11:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In aequali gradu concupiscentiae
et gratiae gratia concupiscentiae, non
concupiscentia gratiae succumbet,
quia homo etiam cum aequali virtute
maiorem habet ad malum quam
ad bonum inclinationem.... Agere
et non agere in aequilibrio virium et
determinare seipsum absque efficaci
Dei praemotione est liberi arbitrii
sani et robusti, non autem infirmi.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
d) However, the Augustinians insist against the Jansenists,
that the delectatio <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>coelestis</foreign>
(<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> efficacious
grace) does not intrinsically compel the will, but acts
merely as a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio moralis</foreign>,
and that while the will obeys the inspiration of grace infallibly
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>infallibiliter</foreign>) it
does not do so necessarily (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non necessario</foreign>).
With equal certainty, though not necessarily, the will, when equipped
solely with sufficient grace, succumbs to concupiscence.
The ultimate reason for the freedom of the will is to be
found in the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>indifferentia
iudicii</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Berti, <hi rend='italic'>De Theol.
Disciplinis</hi>, XIV, 8, n. 18: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quamvis
sit haec efficax gratia antecedens et
Deus sine nobis faciat ut velimus,
nihilo tamen minus per illam non
proponitur nobis bonum sub ratione
omnis boni, quemadmodum proponitur
beatis per lumen gloriae, ideoque
remanet indifferentia iudicii et vera
libertas.</foreign></q></note> By way of exemplification
the Augustinians cite the case of a well-bred man
who, though physically free and able to do so, would
never turn summersaults on a public thoroughfare or
gouge out his own eyes.
</p>

<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Critical Estimate of Augustinianism.</hi>&mdash;On
account of its uncritical methods Augustinianism
has found but few defenders and deserves
notice only in so far as it claims to base its teaching
on St. Augustine.
</p>

<p>
Like the Bible, the writings of that holy Doctor have
been quoted in support of many contradictory systems.<note place='foot'>Calvinism,
Bajanism, Jansenism&mdash;Thomism,
Augustinianism, Molinism,
and Congruism.</note>
If the use of Augustinian terms guaranteed the possession
of Augustinian ideas, Jansenius would have a strong claim
to be considered a faithful disciple of St. Augustine.
Yet how widely does not the <q>Augustinus Iprensis,</q> as
he has been called, differ from the <q>Augustinus Hipponensis</q>!
Augustinianism, too, utterly misconceives the
terms which it employs. Space permits us to call attention
to one or two points only.
</p>

<p>
a) In the first place Augustinianism labors under
an absolutely false conception of sufficient
grace.
</p>

<p>
How can that grace be sufficient for justification which
is first described in glowing colors as
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>parva et invalida</foreign> and
then in the same breath is declared to be insufficient except
when reinforced by a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia magna</foreign>
in the shape of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio
victrix</foreign>? What kind of <q>grace</q> can that be which
in its very nature is so constituted that the will, under
the prevailing influence of concupiscence, infallibly does
the opposite of that to which it is supernaturally impelled?
It is quite true that the distinction between
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia parva</foreign> and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
magna</foreign><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Gratia et Libero Arbitrio</hi>, c.
17.</note> is found in St. Augustine.
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
However, he understands by <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia parva</foreign>
not sufficient grace, but the grace of prayer
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia remote sufficiens</foreign>),
and by <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia magna</foreign>, not efficacious grace as
such, but grace sufficient to perform a good act (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
proxime sufficiens</foreign>).<note place='foot'>Cfr. Palmieri,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina
Actuali</hi>, pp. 433 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) Augustinianism is unable to reconcile its
theory of a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemotio moralis</foreign> with the dogma of
free-will.
</p>

<p>
Under the Augustinian system the influence of efficacious
grace can be conceived in but two ways. Either
it is so strong that the will is physically unable to withhold
its consent; or it is only strong enough that the
consent of the will can be inferred with purely moral
certainty. In the former alternative we have a prevenient
necessity which determines the will <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad unum</foreign>
and consequently destroys its freedom. In the latter, there can be
no infallible foreknowledge of the future free acts of rational
creatures on the part of God, because the Augustinians
reject the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia media</foreign> of the Molinists
and expressly admit that the same grace which proves effective
in one man remains ineffective in another because of the
condition of his heart.<note place='foot'>On the
insufficiency of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>indifferentia
iudicii</foreign> to preserve free-will,
<hi rend='italic'>v. supra</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) Finally, the three fundamental principles of
the Augustinian system are false and have no
warrant in the writings of St. Augustine.
</p>

<p>
It is not true that pleasure (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>delectatio</foreign>) is
the font and well-spring of all supernaturally good deeds. Such deeds may also be
inspired by hatred, fear, sorrow, etc.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Trid.</hi>, Sess. VI, cap. 6.</note> With
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
many men the fear of God or a sense of duty is as strong
an incentive to do good as the sweet consciousness of
treading the right path. St. Augustine did not regard
<q>celestial delectation</q> as the essential mark of efficacious grace, nor
concupiscence as the characteristic note of sin.<note place='foot'><q><foreign
lang='la' rend='italic'>Proponitur praemium ut
pecces, i.e. quod te delectat</foreign>,</q> he
says; <q>... <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Terreris minis, facis
propter quod times.... Si cupiditas
non valuit, forte timor valebit ut
pecces.... Itaque ad omne recte
factum amor et timor ducit. Ut
facias bene, amas Deum et times
Deum; ut autem facias male, amas
mundum et times mundum.</foreign></q> <hi rend='italic'>In
Ps.</hi>, 79, c. 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
The second and third principles of the Augustinian system
are likewise false. If delectation is only one motive
among many, its varying intensity cannot be the standard
of our conduct; and still less can it be said that the
will is morally compelled in each instance to obey the relatively
stronger as against the weaker delectation; for any
necessitation that does not depend on the free will excludes
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>libertas a coactione</foreign>,
but not that <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>libertas a necessitate</foreign>
which constitutes the notion of liberty. There
can be no freedom of the will unless the will is able to
resist delectation at all times. Consequently, the fourth
principle of the Augustinians, by which they pretend to
uphold free-will, is also false.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Schiffini,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>,
pp. 422 sqq.; Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Divina Actuali</hi>, thes. 54.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Readings</hi>:&mdash;The literature on the different systems of grace
is enormous. We can mention only a few of the leading works.
</p>

<p>
On the Thomist side: *Bañez, O. P., <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S. Theol.
S. Thom.</hi>, Salamanca 1584 sqq.&mdash;*Alvarez, O. P., <hi rend='italic'>De Auxiliis
Gratiae et Humani Arbitrii Viribus</hi>, Rome 1610.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Idem</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Responsionum
Libri Quatuor</hi>, Louvain 1622.&mdash;Ledesma, O. P., <hi rend='italic'>De Divinae
Gratiae Auxiliis</hi>, Salamanca 1611.&mdash;*Gonet, O. P., <hi rend='italic'>Clypeus
Theologiae Thomisticae</hi>, 16 vols., Bordeaux 1659-69.&mdash;Contenson,
O. P., <hi rend='italic'>Theologia Mentis et Cordis</hi>, Lyons 1673.&mdash;De Lemos,
O. P., <hi rend='italic'>Panoplia Divinae Gratiae</hi>, 4 vols., Liège 1676.&mdash;Goudin,
O. P., <hi rend='italic'>De Scientia et Voluntate Dei</hi>, new ed., Louvain
1874.&mdash;*Gotti,
O. P., <hi rend='italic'>Theologia Scholastico-Dogmatica iuxta Mentem
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
Divi Thomae</hi>, Venice 1750.&mdash;Gazzaniga, O. P., <hi rend='italic'>Theologia
Dogmatica in Systema Redacta</hi>, 2 vols., Vienne 1776.&mdash;*Billuart,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, diss. 5 (ed. Lequette, t. III, pp. 123
sqq.).&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Idem</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Le
Thomisme Triomphant</hi>, Paris 1725.&mdash;*Fr. G. Feldner, O. P., <hi rend='italic'>Die
Lehre des hl. Thomas über die Willensfreiheit</hi>, Prague
1890.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Idem</hi>,
in Commer's <hi rend='italic'>Jahrbuch für Philosophie und spekulative
Theologie</hi>, 1894 sqq.&mdash;*Dummermuth, O. P., <hi rend='italic'>S. Thomas et
Doctrina Praemotionis Physicae</hi>, Paris 1886.&mdash;I. A. Manser,
<hi rend='italic'>Possibilitas
Praemotionis Physicae Thomisticae</hi>, Fribourg (Switzerland)
1895.&mdash;Joh. Ude, <hi rend='italic'>Doctrina Capreoli de Influxu Dei in Actus
Voluntatis Humanae</hi>, Graz 1905.&mdash;Del Prado, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia et Libero
Arbitrio</hi>, 3 vols., Fribourg (Switzerland) 1907.&mdash;P. Garrigou-Lagrange,
<hi rend='italic'>S. Thomas et le Néomolinisme</hi>, Paris 1917.
</p>

<p>
On the Augustinian side: Card. Norisius, <hi rend='italic'>Vindiciae Augustinianae,</hi>
Padua 1677.&mdash;*Berti, <hi rend='italic'>De Theologicis Disciplinis</hi>, 8 vols.,
Rome 1739 sqq.&mdash;Bellelli, <hi rend='italic'>Mens Augustini de Modo Reparationis
Humanae Naturae</hi>, 2 vols., Rome 1773.&mdash;L. de Thomassin,
<hi rend='italic'>Mémoires sur la Grâce, etc.</hi>, Louvain 1668.
</p>

<p>
For a list of Molinistic and Congruistic authors see pp. <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref> sq.
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Article 2. Molinism And Congruism</head>

<p>
The point in which these two systems meet,
and in regard to which they differ from Thomism
and Augustinianism, is the definition of efficacious
grace as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>efficax ab extrinseco sive per
accidens</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
This conception was violently attacked by the Spanish
Dominican Bañez and other divines. About 1594,
the controversy between the followers of Bañez and the
Molinists waxed so hot that Pope Clement VIII appointed
a special commission to settle it. This was the
famous <hi rend='italic'>Congregatio de Auxiliis</hi>, consisting of picked
theologians from both the Dominican and the Jesuit orders.
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
It debated the matter for nine full years without
arriving at a decision. Finally Pope Paul V, at the suggestion
of St. Francis de Sales, declared both systems to
be orthodox and defensible, and strictly forbade the contending
parties to denounce each other as heretical.<note place='foot'>On the
<hi rend='italic'>Congregatio de Auxiliis</hi>,
so called because the principal
question under discussion was the
help (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>auxilia</foreign>) afforded by grace, see
Astrain, S. J., in the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic Encyclopedia</hi>,
Vol. IV, pp. 238 sq., and
Schneemann, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>Die Entstehung
und weitere Entwicklung der
thomistisch-molinistischen Controverse</hi>,
Freiburg 1879; also in a Latin
translation, Freiburg 1881.</note>
</p>

<p>
While Thomism devoted its efforts mainly to the defense
of grace, Molinism made it its chief business to
champion the dogma of free-will.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Molinism.</hi>&mdash;Molinism takes its name from
the Jesuit Luis de Molina, who published a famous
treatise under the title <hi rend='italic'>Concordia Liberi Arbitrii
cum Gratiae Donis</hi> at Lisbon, in 1588. His
teaching may be outlined as follows:
</p>

<p>
a) In <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actu primo</foreign> there is no intrinsic and
ontological but merely an extrinsic and accidental distinction between
efficacious and sufficient grace, based upon their respective
effects. Sufficient grace becomes efficacious by the consent
of the will; if the will resists, grace remains inefficacious
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inefficax</foreign>) and
<emph>merely</emph> sufficient
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia mere sufficiens</foreign>).
Consequently, one and the same grace may be
efficacious in one case and inefficacious in another. It all
depends on the will.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Molina, <hi rend='italic'>Concordia Liberi
Arbitrii cum Gratiae Donis</hi>, qu. 14,
art. 13, dip. 38: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Asserimus auxilia
praevenientis atque adiuvantis
gratiae ... pendere a libero consensu
et cooperatione liberi arbitrii
nostri cum illis atque adeo in libera
potestate nostra esse, vel illa efficacia
reddere consentiendo et cooperando
cum illis ad actus, quibus ad
iustificationem disponimur, vel inefficacia
illa reddere continendo consensum
et cooperationem nostram
aut ettam eliciendo contrarium consensum.</foreign></q>
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, disp. 12: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quare
fieri potest, ut duorum qui aequali
auxilio interius a Deo vocantur, unus
pro libertate sui arbitrii convertatur
et alter infidelitate permaneat.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>

<p>
b) This theory involves no denial of the priority and
superior dignity of grace in the work of salvation. The
will, considered as a mere faculty, and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in actu primo</foreign>, is
raised to the supernatural order by prevenient grace
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia praeveniens</foreign>),
which imparts to it all the moral
and physical power necessary to perform free salutary
acts. Neither can the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actus secundus</foreign> be regarded as a
product of the unaided will; it is the result of grace coöperating
with free-will.<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Auxilium
gratiae praevenientis</foreign>,</q>
says Molina, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>est influxus Dei
in liberum arbitrium, quo illud
movet et excitat potensque reddit, ut
eo pacto motum tamquam habens
iam in se ipso principium efficiens
actuum supernaturalium simul influendo
ulterius eos producat.</foreign></q> Molina,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, qu. 14, art. 13, disp. 41.</note>
Consequently, the will by giving
its consent does not increase the power of grace, but
it is grace which makes possible, prepares, and aids the
will in performing free acts. To say that the influence of
grace goes farther than this would be to assert that it acts
independently of the will, and would thereby deny the
freedom of the latter.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Molina,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, qu. 23, art.
4, disp. 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quando audis consensum
nostrum efficacia reddere auxilia
gratiae, non ita id intelligas,
quasi arbitrium nostrum vim aliquam
seu efficacitatem tribuat auxiliis ipsis;
arbitrium enim et influxus noster
nullam vim conferunt gratiae auxiliis,
sed potius auxilia vim et propensionem
arbitrio tribuunt ad consensum
eliciendum.</foreign></q> <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Appendix
ad obi.</hi> 3 (ed. Paris., 1876, p.
595): <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Solum significare volumus,
auxilium illud liberum nobis relinquere
consensum nostrum ad conversionem,
nec tale esse, ut nullam
necessitatem, etiam consequentiae, arbitrio
ad talem consensum aut conversionem
ponat.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
c) The infallibility with which efficacious grace works
its effects is to be explained not by God's absolute will,
but by His infallible foreknowledge through the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia
media</foreign>,&mdash;a Molinistic postulate which was first defined
and scientifically demonstrated by Father Fonseca, S. J.,
the teacher of Suarez.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God: His
Knowability, Essence, and Attributes</hi>,
pp. 383 sqq.</note> God foreknows not only the
absolutely free acts (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>futura</foreign>)
of His rational creatures
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
by the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia visionis</foreign>,
but likewise their hypothetically free acts
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>futuribilia</foreign>)
by means of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia media</foreign>,
and hence He infallibly knows from all eternity what
attitude the free-will of man would assume in each case
if grace were given him. Consequently, when God, in
the light of this eternal foreknowledge, actually bestows
a grace, this grace will prove efficacious or
inefficacious according as He has foreknown whether
the will will give or withhold its consent. Thus can the
infallibility of efficacious grace be reconciled with the
dogma of free-will without prejudice to such other dogmas
as final perseverance and the predestination of the
elect, because God by virtue of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia media</foreign> has it
absolutely in His power to give or withhold His graces
in each individual case.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Molina,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, qu. 19, art.
6, disp. 2: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hac ratione Deus O.
M. vult omnia bona, quae per arbitrium
nostrum sunt futura, non
solum voluntate conditionali, si nos
quoque ea velimus, sed etiam voluntate
absoluta, quatenus ipsi praevidenti
ea futura placent eademque divina
eius ac singularis bonitas per
arbitrium nostrum intendit ac vult.
Quod autem haec etiam absoluta
voluntas semper impleatur, ex eo est
manifestum, quia nititur certitudine
praescientiae divinae, quod ita res
futura sit per nostrum arbitrium.</foreign></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>,
qu. 23, art. 4, disp. 3:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quoniam quod Deus elegerit eum
rerum ordinem, circumstantiarum et
auxiliorum, sive maiorum sive minorum,
in quo praevidebat eos pro sua
libertate salvandos, qui electione eius
ordinis eo ipso praedestinati sunt
vitamque aeternam pro sua libertate
consequuntur, potius quam alium ex
infinitis, in quo res aliter pro eadem
ipsorum libertate habuisset, non fuit
ex nobis aut pro meritorum et cooperationis
nostrae qualitate, sed ex
sola misericordia Dei.</foreign></q> Cfr. G.
Schneemann, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Controversiarum
de Divinae Gratiae Liberique
Arbitrii Concordia Initia et Progressus</hi>,
Freiburg 1881, pp. 38 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Critical Estimate of Molinism.</hi>&mdash;Even the
most determined opponents of Molinism admit
that this system possesses three important advantages.
</p>

<p>
a) First, it gives a satisfactory account of the
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
sufficiency of <q>merely sufficient grace,</q> which
in its physical nature does not differ essentially
from efficacious grace.
</p>

<p>
Second, Molinism safeguards free-will by denying
that efficacious grace either physically or morally
predetermines the will to one course of action.
</p>

<p>
Third, Molinism explains in a fairly satisfactory
manner why efficacious grace is infallibly
efficacious. God in virtue of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia media</foreign>
knows with metaphysical certainty from all
eternity which graces in each individual case
will prove efficacious through the free consent of
the will and which will remain inefficacious, and
is thereby enabled to bestow or withhold grace
according to His absolute decrees.
</p>

<p>
b) The question may justly be raised, however,
whether, in endeavoring to safeguard freewill,
the Molinists do not undervalue grace, which
is after all the primary and decisive factor in
the work of salvation.
</p>

<p>
There is something incongruous in the notion that
the efficacy or inefficacy of divine grace should depend on
the arbitrary pleasure of a created will. If sufficient
grace does not become efficacious except by the consent of
the will, how can the resultant salutary act be said to be an
effect of grace? St. Paul, St. Augustine, and the councils
of the Church do not say: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus
facit, si volumus</foreign>,</q> but they declare:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus facit, ut faciamus</foreign>,</q>
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus ipse dat ipsum velle et facere
et perficere</foreign>,</q> and so forth. What can this mean if not:
Divine grace need not
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
concern itself with external circumstances, occasions,
humors, etc., but it takes hold of the sinner and actually
converts him, without regard to anything except the decree
of the Divine Will. On account of this and similar
difficulties Cardinal Bellarmine, who was a champion and
protector of P. Molina, seems to have rejected Molinism<note place='foot'>Cfr.
his treatise <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia et
Libero Arbitrio</hi>, I, 12 (ed. Fèvre,
tom. V, p. 527, Paris 1873):
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Prima opinio eorum est, qui gratiam
efficacem constituunt in assensu
et cooperatione humana, ita ut ab
eventu dicatur gratia efficax, quia videlicet
sortitur effectum et ideo sortitur
effectum, quia voluntas humana
cooperatur. Itaque existimant hi autores,
in potestate hominis esse ut
gratiam faciat esse efficacem, quae
alioquin ex se non esset nisi sufficiens.</foreign></q>
Bellarmine treats this opinion
as the extreme counterpart of
Thomism (which he also combats)
and disposes of it thus: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Haec
opinio aliena est omnino a sententia
b. Augustini et, quantum ego existimo,
a sententia etiam Scripturarum
divinarum.</foreign></q> (<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>) Among the
Scriptural texts which he quotes in
support of this view are John VI, 45,
1 Cor. IV, 7, Rom. IX, 11.</note>
in favor of Congruism.<note place='foot'>The learned Cardinal describes
the difference between
Congruism and extreme Molinism
(which latter, it may be remarked,
was not defended by Molina
himself) as follows: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Neque
enim intelligi potest, quo pacto gratia
efficax consistat in illa interna suasione,
quae per liberum arbitrium
respui potest, et tamen infallibilem
effectum habeat, nisi addamus, Deum
iis quos efficaciter et infallibiliter
trahere decrevit, eam suasionem adhibere
quam videt congruere ingenio
eorum et quam certo novit ab eis non
contemnendam.</foreign></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi>, p. 531.)
The objection that this explanation
eventually resolves itself into the
Molinistic theory which he had censured,
Bellarmine meets as follows:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Respondeo sententiam nostram,
quam S. Augustini esse demonstravimus,
aliqua in re cum prima illa
opinione convenire, sed in multis ab
illa discrepare. Convenit enim in eo
quod utraque sententia gratiam sufficentem
et efficacem ponit in auxilio
excitante potissimum, non in adiuvante.
Sed discrepant inter se, quod
prima opinio vult efficaciam gratiae
pendere a voluntate humana, nostra
vero pendere vult a voluntate Dei.</foreign></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>, cap. 13.)</note>
</p>

<p>
c) The same reasons that induced Bellarmine
to embrace Congruism probably led the Jesuit
General Claudius Aquaviva, in 1613, to order
all teachers of theology in the Society to lay
greater emphasis on the Congruistic element in
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
the notion of efficacious grace. This measure
was quite in harmony with the principles defended
by the Jesuit members of the <hi rend='italic'>Congregatio
de Auxiliis</hi> before Clement VIII and Paul V.
Aquaviva's order is of sufficient importance to
deserve a place in the text of this volume: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nostri
in posterum omnino doceant, inter eam gratiam
quae effectum re ipsâ habet atque efficax dicitur,
et eam quam sufficientem nominant, non tantum
discrimen esse in actu secundo, quia ex usu liberi
arbitrii etiam cooperantem gratiam habentis
effectum sortiatur, altera non item; sed in ipso
actu primo, quod positâ scientiâ conditionalium
[scientiâ mediâ] ex efficaci Dei proposito atque
intentione efficiendi certissime in nobis boni, de
industria ipse ea media seligit atque eo modo et
tempore confert, quo videt effectum, infallibiliter
habitura, aliis usurus, si haec inefficacia praevidisset.
Quare semper moraliter et in ratione beneficii
plus aliquid in efficaci, quam in sufficienti
gratia est, in actu primo contineri: atque hac ratione
efficere Deum, ut re ipsâ faciamus, non tantum
quia dat gratiam quâ facere possimus. Quod
idem dicendum est de perseverantia, quae procul
dubio donum est.</foreign></q> This modified, or perhaps we
had better say, more sharply determined form
of Molinism is called Congruism.<note place='foot'>Further details in Schneemann,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Controv.</hi>, pp. 302 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Congruism.</hi>&mdash;The system thus recommended
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
by Aquaviva in its fundamental principles
really originated with Molina himself. It was
developed by the great Jesuit theologians Suarez,
Vasquez, and Lessius, and became the official
system of the Society of Jesus under Muzio
Vitelleschi (d. 1645) and Piccolomini (d. 1651).
</p>

<p>
a) The distinction between <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia congrua</foreign> and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia incongrua</foreign> is founded on the writings
of St. Augustine, who speaks of the elect as
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>congruenter
vocati</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Ad Simplician.</hi>,
I, qu. 2, n.
13: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si vellet [Deus] etiam ipsorum
misereri, posset ita vocare,
quomodo illis aptum esset, ut et moverentur
et intelligerent et sequerentur.
Verum est ergo: Multi vocati,
pauci electi. Illi enim electi, qui
congruenter vocati; illi autem qui
non congruebant neque contemperabantur
vocationi, non electi, quia
non secuti, quamvis vocati. Item
verum est: Neque volentis neque
currentis, sed miserentis est Dei, quia
etiamsi multos vocet, eorum tamen
miseretur, quos ita vocat, quomodo
iis vocari aptum est ut sequantur.
Falsum est autem, si quis dicit:
Igitur non miserentis Dei, sed volentis
atque currentis est hominis, quia
nullius Deus frustra miseretur.
Cuius autem miseretur, sic eum vocat
quomodo scit ei congruere, ut
vocantem non respuat.</foreign></q></note> The
Congruists maintain against the extreme Molinists that
the efficacy of grace is not attributable solely to a free determination
of the will, but, at least in part, to the fact
that grace is bestowed under circumstances favorable
to its operation, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> <q>congruous</q> in that sense. When
the circumstances are comparatively adverse
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>incongrua</foreign>),
grace remains merely sufficient. A prudent father
who knows how to govern his children without physical
force will speak the right word to each at the proper
time. Similarly God adapts His grace, if it is to prove
efficacious, to the circumstances of each individual case,
thereby attaining His purpose without fail. Thus the
reckless youth on the city streets needs more powerful
graces than the pious nun in her secluded convent cell,
because he is exposed to stronger temptations and his
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
environment is unfavorable to religious influences. Since
grace is conferred with a wise regard to temperament,
character, inclinations, prejudices, time and place,
there exists between it and free-will a sort of intrinsic
affinity, which in the hands of God becomes an infallible
means of executing His decrees.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Suarez,
<hi rend='italic'>De Aux.</hi>, V, 25:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vocatio efficax illa est, quae ...
includit congruitatem quandam respectu
personae, cui datur, ut sit illi
proportionata et accommodata, sicut
oportet, ut in tali persona, in tali
tempore et occasione infallibiliter effectum
habeat, et per hoc habet illa
vocatio quod congrua et efficax sit.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
b) The actual bestowal of congruous grace, considered
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in actu primo</foreign>,
is undoubtedly a special gift of God,
and hence the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia congrua</foreign>
possesses a higher value than the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia incongrua sive inefficax</foreign>.
An entitatively
weaker impulse of grace, if conferred under comparatively
favorable conditions, is more precious than a
stronger impulse which fails in its purpose by reason
of unfavorable circumstances created by inclination, training,
or environment. Little David accomplished more
with a handful of pebbles in his scrip than had he been
heavily armed.<note place='foot'>1 Kings XVII, 38 sqq.&mdash;Cfr.
Lessius, <hi rend='italic'>De Praedest. et
Reprob.</hi>, sect. 5, n. 106: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ex quibus
patet, gratiam efficacem, si
physice spectetur, non semper esse
maius beneficium, quum saepenumero
ea, quae effectu caret, secundum
suam entitatem longe sit praestantior.
Si tamen spectetur moraliter,
nimirum ut subest praescientiae
infallibili effectus, sic semper
maius est beneficium, etiam ut praecisa
ab actuali effectu et gratia cooperante
seu ut prior actuali suo
influxu in opus, quum Deus, qui non
caeco modo operatur, ex mero suo
beneplacito et inscrutabili iudicio
seligat pro quibusdam gratias illas
quas effectum habituras videt, non
solum ut gratiae quaedam sunt, sed
etiam formaliter, ut effectum habiturae
sunt.... Ex quibus constat,
quo sensu distinctio gratiae congruae
et non congruae admittenda sit,
quam numquam reieci, sed totis animis
et sensu et praxi semper sum
amplexus.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
c) Congruism assigns a far more important rôle to
grace than extreme Molinism. It makes the will depend
on efficacious grace, not the efficacy of grace upon the
will. Bellarmine illustrates this difference by the example
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
of a sermon which, under an entirely equal distribution
of internal grace, converts one sinner while it leaves
another untouched.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Grat. et Lib. Arbitr.</hi>,
ed. Fèvre, t. V, p. 533.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Critical Estimate of Congruism.</hi>&mdash;Among
the different systems devised for the purpose of
harmonizing the dogmas of grace and free-will,
Congruism probably comes nearest the truth. It
strikes a golden mean between the two extremes
of Pelagianism and Semipelagianism on the one
hand, and Calvinism and Jansenism on the other,
and its principal theses can be supported by clear
and unmistakable passages from the writings of
St. Augustine.
</p>

<p>
a) Other points in its favor are the following:
<q>Sufficient grace,</q> in the Congruist hypothesis, is
truly sufficient so far as God is concerned, because
its inefficaciousness is attributable solely
to the human will. That free-will is properly
safeguarded under the influence of efficacious
grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia congrua</foreign>) is admitted even by
theologians of the opposing schools. True, Congruism
does not regard the will as an abstract
notion, but as a factor closely interwoven with the
concrete circumstances of daily life. As favorable
circumstances (education, association, temperament)
merely influence the will but do not
compel it, so supernatural grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia congrua
s. efficax</foreign>) may soften the will and occasionally
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
even break down its resistance, but (rare
cases excepted)<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
p. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>.</note> will never compel it to do
good. Congruism marks a distinct advance over
extreme Molinism also in this, that it bases the
difference between <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax</foreign>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>congrua</foreign>) and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia inefficax</foreign>
not entirely on the will of man,
but likewise on the will of God, whereby it is able
to explain such formulas as <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus facit,
ut faciamus</foreign>,</q>
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus est, qui discernit</foreign>,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>etc.</hi>, in a manner
entirely compatible with the dogmatic teaching of
the Church.<note place='foot'>For the proofs of this assertion
see Palmieri, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina
Actuali</hi>, thes. 50.</note>
</p>

<p>
The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>modus operandi</foreign>
of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia congrua</foreign> (efficacious
grace) is explained by Congruism, in
common with Molinism, as follows: There is a
threefold efficacy: the efficacy of power (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>efficacia
virtutis</foreign>), the efficacy of union
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>efficacia connexionis</foreign>),
and the efficacy of infallible success
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>efficacia infallibilitatis</foreign>).
Grace (both efficacious
and sufficient) does not derive its <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>efficacia
virtutis</foreign> from the free-will of man, nor from the
knowledge of God (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia media</foreign>), but from
itself. The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>efficacia connexionis</foreign>
(of union between act and grace) on the other hand, depends
entirely on the free-will, since, according to the
Council of Trent as well as that of the Vatican,
efficacious grace does not operate irresistibly but
can be <q>cast off.</q> The
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>efficacia infallibilitatis</foreign>
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
springs from God's certain foreknowledge
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia media</foreign>),
which cannot be deceived.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Augustine,
<hi rend='italic'>De Civitate
Dei</hi>, V, 9, 4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quod [voluntates]
facturae sunt, ipsae omnino facturae,
quia facturas ille praescivit, cuius
praescientia falli non potest.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
b) Nevertheless, it would be unreasonable to contend
that Congruism solves all difficulties. The mystery surrounding
both the unequal distribution of efficacious grace
and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia media</foreign> still remains.
Moreover, the theory that God adjusts himself slavishly to all the circumstances
of His creatures, can hardly be reconciled with
His dignity and omnipotence. It would no doubt be far
worthier of His majesty to seize upon the free will of
man and compel it to perform the salutary act which He
wishes it to perform. Whoever has studied the lives of
saints and eminent converts knows that the sudden and
seemingly unaccountable changes of heart which many of
them have experienced can hardly be regarded as miracles
in the strict sense, though on the other hand it seems certain
that grace worked in them with little or no regard to
the <q>congruity</q> of circumstances. Again, it is one of
the highest and most sublime missions of grace not to
be balked by unfavorable circumstances but to re-shape
them by changing a man's temperament, dulling concupiscence,
weakening the power of temptation, and so
forth. In other words, grace does not depend on but
controls and fashions the circumstances of the recipient.
</p>

<p>
After all is said, therefore, the relation of grace and
free-will still remains an unsolved mystery.<note place='foot'>On
Congruism cfr. Chr. Pesch,
<hi rend='italic'>Prael. Dogmat.</hi>, Vol. V, 3rd ed., pp.
167 sqq.; Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmat.
Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII, § 447.
On the various interpretations of
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedefinitio actuum salutarium</foreign>,
within as well as without the Jesuit
Order, see Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Instit. Theol.</hi>, Vol.
III, pp. 93 sqq., Paris 1896, and especially
Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>,
pp. 458 sqq.</note>
</p>

<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>

<p>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Syncretism.</hi>&mdash;Seeing that each of the different
systems which we so far reviewed contains
grains of truth, some theologians<note place='foot'>Chief among them Ysambert,
Tournely, St. Alphonsus de' Liguori,
Albert Knoll, and more recently
Cardinal Katschthaler.</note> have adopted
the good points of all four and combined them
into a fifth, called Syncretism.
</p>

<p>
These authors begin by assuming the existence of two
quite distinct sorts of efficacious grace, the (Thomistic-Augustinian)
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax ab intrinseco</foreign>, and the
(Molinistic-Congruistic) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax ab
extrinseco</foreign>. The former,
they contend, is bestowed for the performance of
more difficult good works, such as resisting grievous temptations,
observing onerous precepts, exercising patience
in severe tribulation, etc.; while the latter enables man
to accomplish less difficult acts, such as short prayers,
slight mortifications, etc. The connecting link between
the two is prayer, which has been instituted for the purpose
of enabling man to obtain that <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax ab
intrinseco</foreign> which is necessary for the performance of the
more difficult works of salvation. Sacred Scripture
teaches that prayer originates in grace, that it is binding
upon all men, and that it accomplishes its purpose infallibly.<note place='foot'>For
a more detailed account
see Tournely, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Christi</hi>, qu.
7, art. 4, concl. 5; Katschthaler, <hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia</hi>, pp. 173 sqq., Ratisbon 1880.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Critical Estimate of Syncretism.</hi>&mdash;The
outstanding characteristic of Syncretism is its
insistence on prayer as a highly important, not to
say the most important, factor in the work of
salvation.
</p>

<p>
a) In this the Syncretistic school is undoubtedly
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
right. Sacred Scripture and Tradition both
strongly emphasize the importance and necessity
of prayer, so much so that one naturally expects
to find prayer playing an essential and indispensable
rôle in every complete and orthodox
system of grace. <q>The present economy of grace
is essentially and intrinsically an economy of
prayer,</q> is a theological axiom which cannot
be too strongly insisted upon. To have brought
out this great truth forcibly and luminously is the
merit of Syncretism.
</p>

<p>
b) We do not mean to intimate, however, that the
Syncretistic theory has solved the problem of the relation
between free-will and grace. On the contrary, by adopting
two such heterogeneous concepts as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax
ab intrinseco</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax ab
extrinseco</foreign> it has actually
increased the difficulties found in the other systems.
For now we are put before the dilemma:&mdash;the Thomistic
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax</foreign> either supposes free-will or
it does not: if it does, there is no reason to limit this grace
to the more difficult works of salvation; if it does
not, then the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia efficax</foreign> can be of no
assistance in the performance of more difficult works, because these too,
to be meritorious, require the coöperation of free-will.
</p>

<p>
The Syncretists try to evade this dilemma by contending
that prayer, as the connecting link, communicates its
own liberty and meritoriousness to the salutary acts performed
through its agency, in other words, that these
acts are the effect of prayer
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>effectus orationis</foreign>). But
aside from the fact that prayer itself is quite often a
difficult act, the more arduous works of salvation would
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
in the Syncretist hypothesis be stripped of their meritoriousness
and degraded to the level of a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>voluntarium
in causa</foreign>, which is an untenable assumption.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, V, 20,
2.</note>
Finally, there is something illogical and unsatisfactory
in admitting on equal terms, as it were, two such incompatible
notions as the Thomistic <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cognitio Dei in decretis
praedeterminantibus</foreign> and the Molinistic
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scientia media</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Thus in the end all attempts to harmonize the dogmas
of grace and free-will fail to solve the mystery, and we
are compelled to exclaim with St. Paul: <q>O the depth
of the riches of the wisdom and of the knowledge of
God! How incomprehensible are His judgments, and
how unsearchable His ways!</q><note place='foot'>Rom. XI, 33. On Syncretism
cfr. Alb. a Bulsano, <hi rend='italic'>Inst. Theol.
Dogmat. Specialis</hi>, ed. by Gottfried
a Graun, O. M. Cap., tom. II, pp.
193 sqq., Innsbruck 1894.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Readings</hi>:&mdash;Molinistic and Congruistic works of importance
are: *Molina, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>Concordia Liberi Arbitrii cum Gratiae Donis</hi>,
Lisbon 1588 (repr. Paris 1876).&mdash;Platel, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>Auctoritas contra
Praedeterminationem Physicam pro Scientia Media</hi>, Douai 1669.&mdash;Henao,
S. J., <hi rend='italic'>Scientia Media Historice Propugnata</hi>, Lyons
1655.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Idem</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Scientia Media Theologice
Defensa</hi>, Lyons 1674-6.&mdash;De Aranda, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>De Deo Sciente,
Praedestinante et Auxiliante seu Schola Scientiae Mediae</hi>, Saragossa
1693.&mdash;*Suarez, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>De Concursu, Motione et Auxilio Dei</hi>,
new ed., Paris 1856.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Idem</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De
Auxilio Efficaci</hi>, Paris ed., 1856, t. XI.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Idem</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>De Vera Intelligentia Auxilii Efficacis</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Op.
Posthum.</hi>, t. X, Appendix).&mdash;*Lessius, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Efficaci</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Opusc.</hi>, t. II, Paris 1878).&mdash;Sardagna,
S. J., <hi rend='italic'>Theologia Dogmatico-Polemica</hi>, Ratisbon
1771.&mdash;Wirceburgenses (Kilber, S. J.), <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, new ed.,
Paris 1853.&mdash;Murray, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, Dublin 1877.&mdash;B.
Jungmann, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>,
6th ed., Ratisbon 1896.&mdash;Th. de Régnon, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>Bañez et Molina,
Histoire, Doctrines, Critique, Métaphysique</hi>, Paris 1883.&mdash;Card.
Mazzella, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Christi</hi>, 3rd ed., Rome
1882.&mdash;Palmieri, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina Actuali</hi>, thes.
49-58, Gulpen 1885.&mdash;*V. Frins, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>S. Thomae Doctrina de
Cooperatione Dei cum Omni
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
Natura Creata, Praesertim Libera, seu S. Thomas Praedeterminationis
Physicae Adversarius</hi>, Paris 1890.&mdash;*Schiffini, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Divina</hi>, disp. 5, Freiburg 1901.&mdash;Card. Billot, S. J.,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Christi et Libero Hominis Arbitrio</hi>, I, Rome
1908.&mdash;Limbourg, S. J. <q><hi rend='italic'>Selbstzeichnung der thomistischen
Gnadenlehre</hi>,</q> in the Innsbruck <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für kath.
Theologie</hi>, 1877.&mdash;B. J. Otten, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>A Manual of the
History of Dogmas</hi>, Vol. II, St. Louis
1918, pp. 493 sqq.
</p>

<p>
Among the theologians who have tried to harmonize Thomism
and Molinism we may mention, besides Ysambert and St. Alphonsus
de' Liguori, *Tournely, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, Venice 1755.&mdash;Card. Jos.
Pecci, <hi rend='italic'>Sentenza di S. Tommaso circa l'Influsso di Dio sulle Azioni
delle Creature Ragionevoli e sulla Scienza Media</hi>, Rome 1885.&mdash;A.
Adeodatus, J. <hi rend='italic'>Pecci's Schrift: Lehre des hl. Thomas über den
Einfluss Gottes, etc., analysiert</hi>, Mainz 1888.&mdash;C. Krogh-Tonning,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Christi et de Libero Arbitrio S. Thomae Doctrina</hi>,
Christiania 1898.&mdash;J. Herrmann, C. SS. R., <hi rend='italic'>De Divina Gratia</hi>,
Rome 1904.
</p>

<p>
The history of the great controversy between Thomism and
Molinism can be studied in H. Serry, O. P., <hi rend='italic'>Historia Congregationum
de Auxiliis Divinae Gratiae</hi>, Louvain 1700 and Antwerp
1709.&mdash;Livinus de Meyer, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>Historia Controversiarum de
Divinae Gratiae Auxiliis</hi>, Antwerp 1705.&mdash;*Schneemann, S. J.,
<hi rend='italic'>Entstehung der thomistisch-molinistischen Controverse</hi>, Freiburg
1879.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>*Idem</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Weitere Entwicklung der
thomistisch-molinistischen Controverse</hi>, Freiburg
1880.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>*Idem</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Controversiarum de Divinae
Gratiae Liberique Arbitrii Concordia Initia et Progressus</hi>, Freiburg
1881.
</p>
</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>

<div rend='page=break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part II. Sanctifying Grace</head>

<p>
The grace of justification, commonly called
sanctifying grace, is related to actual grace as an
end to its means. Actual grace introduces the
state of sanctifying grace or preserves and augments
it where it already exists.
</p>

<p>
This fact makes it advisable to consider the
genesis of sanctifying grace before studying its
nature and effects.
</p>

<p>
We shall therefore treat in three chapters:
(1) of the Process of Justification (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>iustificatio in
fieri</foreign>); (2) of the State of Justification
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>iustificatio
in esse</foreign>), and (3) of the Fruits of Justification
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>iustificatio in facto esse</foreign>),
or the Merit of Good
Works.
</p>

<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_I'/>
<head>Chapter I. The Genesis Of Sanctifying Grace, Or The
Process Of Justification</head>

<p>
The justification of an adult human being does
not take place suddenly, but runs through certain
well-defined stages, which in their totality are
called the process of justification.
</p>

<p>
Being a <q>regeneration in God,</q> justification
bears a striking resemblance to the development
of the fœtus in the maternal womb. Like physical
birth, spiritual regeneration is preceded by
travailing, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> fear and painful contrition.
</p>

<p>
The dogmatic teaching of the Catholic Church
on justification is formally defined by the Tridentine
Council, whose decrees<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trid.</hi>,
Sess. VI, cap. 5:
<q><hi rend='italic'>De Necessitate Praeparationis</hi>,</q>
and cap. 6: <q><hi rend='italic'>De Modo Praeparationis</hi>.</q></note>
contain a masterly
analysis of this most interesting of psychological
processes. The holy Synod puts faith at the beginning.
<q>Faith,</q> it says, <q>is the beginning of
human salvation, the foundation and the root of
all justification.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 8:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fides est
humanae salutis initium, fundamentum
et radix omnis iustificationis.</foreign></q></note> The nature of faith and the
part it plays in justification were the chief points
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
in dispute between the Church and the so-called
Reformers. Luther and his followers denatured
the traditional Catholic teaching by basing justification
solely on faith, which they falsely defined
as mere confidence or trust in the mercy of God.
</p>

<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section 1. The Necessity Of Faith For Justification</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Lutheran Heresy vs. the Teaching
of the Church.</hi>&mdash;The Protestant Reformers,
notably Luther and Calvin, did not deny that
justification is wrought by faith, but they defined
justifying faith in a manner altogether foreign to
the mind of the Church.
</p>

<p>
a) They distinguished three kinds of faith: (1) belief
in the existence of God and the historical fact that
Christ has come on earth, suffered, and ascended (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides
historica</foreign>); (2) the sort of trust which is required for
exercising the gift of miracles (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides
miraculorum</foreign>); and
(3) faith in the divine promises with regard to the remission
of sin (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides promissionum</foreign>).
The last-mentioned species of faith they subdivided into general and
particular. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fides generalis</foreign>
is that by which we believe
that the righteousness of Christ <q>covers</q> (but does not
wipe out) our sins. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fides
specialis</foreign> or fiduciary faith
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fiducia</foreign>)
is that by which a man applies to himself the
righteousness of the Redeemer, firmly trusting that his
sins are for Christ's sake not imputed to him. Thus the
Reformers erroneously transferred the seat of justifying
faith from the intellect to the will and completely
subverted the Catholic notion of faith as an intellectual
assent to revealed truth.
</p>

<p>
b) To this fundamental error the Fathers of
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
Trent opposed the orthodox doctrine that
(adults) <q>are disposed unto justice when, excited
and assisted by divine grace, receiving faith by
hearing, they are freely moved towards God, believing
those things to be true which God has revealed
and promised, ...</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 6:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Disponuntur
autem ad ipsam iustitiam, dum
excitati divinâ gratiâ et adiuti fidem
ex auditu concipientes libere moventur
in Deum, credentes vera esse
quae divinitus revelata et promissa
sunt.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 798).</note> and they solemnly
anathematized those who assert <q>that justifying
faith is nothing else but confidence in the divine
mercy which remits sin for Christ's sake, or that
this confidence alone is that whereby we are justified.</q><note place='foot'>Sess.
VI, can. 12: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, fidem iustificantem nihil
aliud esse quam fiduciam divinae
misericordiae peccata remittentis
propter Christum, vel eam fiduciam
solam esse, quâ iustificamur, anathema
sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
822.) Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Conc. Vatic.</hi>, Sess. III,
cap. 3, <q><hi rend='italic'>De Fide</hi></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1789).</note>
</p>

<p>
Hence it is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de fide</foreign> that the faith whereby man
is justified, is not a confident persuasion of being
esteemed righteous in the sight of God, but a
dogmatic or theoretical belief in the truths of
Divine Revelation.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Refutation of the Lutheran Doctrine
of Fiduciary Faith.</hi>&mdash;Whenever Sacred Scripture
and Tradition speak of justifying faith, they
mean a dogmatic belief in the truths of Revelation,&mdash;that
faith which the Protestants call <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides
historica</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
a) Christ Himself solemnly commanded His
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
Apostles and their successors to preach the Gospel
to all nations, and before baptizing them to convert
them to a firm belief in certain specified
truths which no man may reject except at the
peril of his eternal salvation.
</p>

<p>
α) Mark XVI, 15 sq.: <q>Go ye into the whole world,
and preach the gospel<note place='foot'>κηρύξατε τὸ εὐαγγέλιον.</note>
to every creature: He that believeth
[<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> in the Gospel] and is baptized, shall be
saved; but he that believeth not shall be condemned.</q>
Agreeable to this injunction St. John declares it to be
the object of his Gospel <q>that you may believe that<note place='foot'>ἵνα
πιστεύσητε ὅτι.</note>
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing,
you may have life in his name.</q><note place='foot'>John XX, 31.</note> The Gospel is
written <q>that we may believe.</q> What must we believe?
That <q>Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God.</q> This is a
revealed truth by firmly believing which we shall be
saved. When the treasurer of Queen Candace begged
to be baptized, Philip the deacon said to him: <q>If thou
believest with all thy heart, thou mayest.</q> The eunuch
replied: <q>I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,</q>
whereupon Philip baptized him.<note place='foot'>Acts VIII, 37.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) St. Paul in his Epistles to the Romans and
the Galatians eloquently insists on the necessity of
faith, not a mere <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides
fiducialis</foreign>, but a believing acceptance
of Divine Revelation. Cfr. Rom. X, 9
sq.: <q>For if thou confess with thy mouth the
Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart that God hath
raised him up from the dead, thou shalt be saved.
For with the heart we believe unto justice, but
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.</q><note place='foot'>Rom.
X, 9 sq.: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quia si confitearis
in ore tuo Dominum Iesum
et in corde tuo credideris quod Deus
illum suscitaverit a mortuis, salvus
eris. Corde enim creditur ad iustitiam,
ore autem confessio fit ad salutem.</foreign></q></note>
We must confess with the mouth and believe
with the heart. External profession and internal
faith go together and have for their common
object a certain truth open to our knowledge,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: the resurrection of Christ,&mdash;a dogma in
which the whole teaching of the atonement lies
imbedded.
</p>

<p>
The character of justifying faith is still more
plainly evident from Heb. XI, 6: <q>Without faith
it is impossible to please God. For he that cometh
to God [he that is to be justified], must believe
that He is [the existence of God], and is a rewarder
to them that seek Him.</q><note place='foot'>Heb. XI,
6: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sine fide autem
impossibile est placere Deo; credere
enim oportet accedentem ad Deum
[i.e. iustificandum] quia est [=existentia
Dei] et inquirentibus se
remunerator sit.</foreign></q></note> The Apostle
here clearly asserts both the necessity of justifying
faith and the minimum of doctrine to be explicitly
<q>believed,</q> <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: the existence of God and eternal
retribution.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God: His
Knowability, Essence, and Attributes</hi>,
pp. 39 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
γ) The Lutherans appeal chiefly to Matth. IX, 2, Luke
XVII, 19, Rom. IV, 5, and Heb. XI, 1. But not a
single one of these texts represents fiduciary faith as
the instrumental cause of justification. The word πίστις
occurs no less than eighty times in the Synoptic Gospels
and in St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, but there are
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
only six passages in which it could possibly be construed
as synonymous with <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fiducia</foreign>,
and in none of these is the
interpretation entirely certain. Not once does the New
Testament employ πίστις in the sense of <q>fiduciary
faith,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> a confident
persuasion of one's own righteousness.<note place='foot'>Murray,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, disp. 10, n.
18. Cfr. Becanus, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Habituali</hi>,
c. I, qu. 7, art. 6 sq.; Bellarmine,
<hi rend='italic'>De Iustificatione</hi>, I, 5 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) Tradition is in such perfect agreement with
Scripture on this point that the Reformers did not
venture to deny that their doctrine ran counter to
the time-honored teaching of the Church. The
Fathers unanimously insist on the necessity of
dogmatic faith as a requisite of justification.
</p>

<p>
α) St. Fulgentius of Ruspe, who is regarded as <q>the
best theologian of his time</q> (468-533),<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Bardenhewer-Shahan, <hi rend='italic'>Patrology</hi>,
p. 616, Freiburg and St.
Louis 1908.</note> in his golden
booklet <hi rend='italic'>De Fide seu de Regula Verae Fidei ad Petrum</hi>,
says: <q>I rejoice that you take care to preserve the
true faith without which conversion is useless, nay, impossible.
Apostolic authority tells us that we cannot
please God without faith. For faith is the foundation
of all good [works]; it is the beginning of human salvation,
and without it no one can obtain a place among
the children of God, because without it no one can obtain
the grace of justification in this world or possess eternal life
in the next.</q><note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Prologus:
<q>Gaudeo quod pro
fide vera sine ullo perfidiae vitio
custodienda sollicitudinem geris, sine
qua nulla potest prodesse, imo nec
esse conversio. Apostolica quippe
dicit auctoritas, quia sine fide impossibile
est placere Deo. Fides
namque est bonorum omnium fundamentum.
Fides est humanae salutis
initium. Sine hac fide nemo
ad filiorum Dei numerum potest pervenire,
quia sine ipsa nec in hoc
saeculo quisquam iustificationis gratiam
consequitur nec in futuro
possidebit vitam aeternam.</q></foreign></note> St. Fulgentius was a faithful
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
disciple of St. Augustine, and the whole trend of
his treatise shows that by <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vera
fides</foreign> he understands not the Lutheran
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fiducia propriae iustificationis</foreign>, but
Catholic belief in revealed truth.<note place='foot'>On the traditional concepts of
<q>faith</q> and <q>justification</q> as
held in the Church before Luther's
time, see Denifle, O. P., <hi rend='italic'>Die abendländischen
Schriftausleger bis Luther
über die Iustitia Dei und Iustificatio</hi>,
Mainz 1905.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) This teaching is corroborated by the ancient
practice of instructing the catechumens in the
truths of revelation and requiring them to make a
public profession of faith before Baptism. It was
because they believed and professed the true faith
that the early Christians, who knew nothing of
the Lutheran <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides
fiducialis</foreign>, were called <q>faithful</q>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fideles</foreign>,
πιστοί), to distinguish them from false
believers or heretics (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>haeretici</foreign>,
αἱρητικοὶ, from
αἱρεῖσθαι to choose), who denied some portion or
other of the orthodox creed.
</p>

<p>
c) In analyzing the notions of
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides</foreign> and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas</foreign>
theologians distinguish between <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides
explicita</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides implicita</foreign>,
and between <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas
medii</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas praecepti</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fides explicita</foreign>
is an express and fully developed belief in the truths of revelation;
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides implicita</foreign>, a virtual belief
in whatever may be contained in a dogma explicitly
professed. I make an act of implicit faith when I say,
for instance: <q>I believe whatever the Church teaches,</q>
or: <q>I heartily accept whatever God has revealed.</q>
</p>

<p>
The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas medii</foreign>
is based on the objective relation
of means to an end, and consequently binds all men,
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
even the ignorant and those who are in error without
their own fault. Such, for example, is the necessity of
the eye for seeing, of wings for flying, of grace for performing
salutary acts, of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lumen gloriae</foreign> for the
beatific vision. The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas
praecepti</foreign>, on the other
hand, is founded entirely on the will of God, who positively
commands or forbids under pain of grievous sin,
but is willing to condone non-compliance with his precepts
when it is owing to guiltless ignorance. This applies
to all positive divine precepts, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the law of fasting
and abstinence. It is to be noted that the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas medii</foreign> always involves the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas praecepti</foreign>, because God
must needs will and impose upon us by positive precept
whatever is objectively necessary as a means of salvation.
</p>

<p>
α) The first question that arises with regard to
this twofold faith and necessity is: Are sinners
preparing for justification, and the faithful in general,
obliged by necessity of precept to believe explicitly
all revealed truths? The answer is, No;
because this is practically impossible, and God
does not demand the impossible.
</p>

<p>
Generally speaking, it is sufficient to have an explicit
knowledge of, and give one's firm assent to, the more
important dogmas and moral precepts&mdash;the twelve articles
of the Apostles' Creed, the Commandments of God
and the Church, the Sacraments (as needed), and the Our
Father. All other revealed truths need be held only <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fide
implicitâ</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Mark XVI, 15 sq.; Gal. I, 6 sqq.; Tit. III, 10 sq.</note>
More is of course demanded of educated
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
persons and those who are in duty bound to instruct
others, such as priests and teachers.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>,
2a 2ae, qu. 2, art. 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Post tempus
autem gratiae revelatae tam
maiores quant minores tenentur
[necessitate praecepti] habere fidem
explicitam de mysteriis Christi, praecipue
quantum ad ea, quae communiter
in Ecclesia solemnizantur et
publice proponuntur, sicut sunt articuli
Incarnationis.... Alias autem
subtiles considerationes circa Incarnationis
articulos tenentur aliqui
magis vel minus explicite credere,
secundum quod convenit statui et
officio uniuscuiusque.</foreign></q> This point
is well developed by Ballerini, <hi rend='italic'>Opus
Theologicum Morale</hi>, ed. D. Palmieri,
Vol. II, 3rd ed., pp. 9 sqq.,
Prati 1898.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) A more important and more difficult question
is this: Are there any dogmas, and if so
how many, which must be believed by all men <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fide
explicitâ</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitate
medii</foreign>? St. Paul says:
<q>Without faith it is impossible to please God, for
he that cometh to God, must believe that He is,
and is a rewarder to them that seek Him.</q><note place='foot'>Heb. XI, 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
With but few exceptions,<note place='foot'>Chiefly Andrew Vega, Ripalda,
and some modern writers.</note> Catholic theologians maintain
that the Apostle in this passage means theological
faith, based upon supernatural motives. This interpretation
is borne out by the context, by such parallel texts
as John III, 11 sqq., 32 sqq., 2 Tim. I, 12, 1 John V, 9 sq.,
and by the decisions of several councils.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Trid.</hi>, Sess. VI, cap. 6;
<hi rend='italic'>Conc. Vatican.</hi>, Sess. III, cap. 3, <hi rend='italic'>V.
supra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> sqq.</note> There
can be no reasonable doubt that all men, to be justified and
saved, must have an explicit belief in at least two dogmas,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: the existence of God and eternal retribution. Pope
Innocent XI condemned the Jansenist proposition that explicit
belief in divine retribution is not necessary for
salvation.<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nonnisi
fides unius Dei necessaria
videtur necessitate medii,
non autem explicita remuneratoris.</foreign></q>
<hi rend='italic'>Prop. Damn. ab Innocenti XI.</hi>, prop.
22, in Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 1172.</note>
</p>

<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>

<p>
Are there any other dogmas which must be explicitly
believed <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitate
medii</foreign>? The only dogmas which
might come in question are: the Trinity, the Incarnation,
the immortality of the soul, and the necessity of grace.
The last-mentioned two may be omitted from the list, because
St. Paul does not mention them,<note place='foot'>Heb. XI,
6.</note> and for the additional
reason that belief in immortality is included in the
dogma of eternal retribution, while the necessity of grace
is inseparably bound up with the dogma of Divine Providence,
which in its turn is but a particular aspect of
eternal retribution.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Wirceburg,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, n.
120: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quia tamen qui credit et
sperat remuneratorem supernaturalem,
satis hoc ipso etiam credit animae
perpetuitatem et necessitatem
auxilii melioris ad salutem, fides
horum explicita et per distinctos
conceptus non semper in re et actualiter
necessaria existimatur.</foreign></q></note> Hence the only two dogmas in regard
to which the question at the beginning of this paragraph
can reasonably be asked, are the Blessed Trinity
and the Incarnation.
</p>

<p>
Theologians are divided in the matter. Some maintain
that no human being can or could ever be saved
without explicit belief in both the Trinity and the Incarnation.
Others<note place='foot'>Gregory of Valentia, Becanus,
Thomas Sanchez, and many Thomists.</note>
hold that this <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas medii</foreign> did not
exist under the Old Covenant. A third school<note place='foot'>Suarez,
De Lugo, and a large number of other theologians.</note> avers
that no such necessity can be proved either for the Old or
the New Dispensation.
</p>

<p>
The first of these three opinions is excessively rigorous
and intrinsically improbable. The Jews had no clearly revealed
knowledge of the Trinity and the Incarnation, and
consequently were under no obligation to believe them.
As the divinely constituted guardians of the Messianic
prophecies, they were bound to believe in the Redeemer,
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
though only <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitate
praecepti</foreign>. The gentiles were dispensed
even from this.
</p>

<p>
The second opinion, which limits the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas medii</foreign>
to the New Testament, lacks solid proof. The Scripture
texts cited in its support merely prove the efficaciousness
of belief in Christ,<note place='foot'>Cfr. Rom. III, 22.</note> or the duty of embracing
that belief on the strength of the Apostolic preaching,<note place='foot'>Cfr.
John III, 18.</note>
or, finally, the impossibility of redemption except
through the mediation of Jesus;<note place='foot'>Cfr. Acts IV,
12.</note>&mdash;all truths which in
themselves have nothing to do with the question under
discussion.
</p>

<p>
The third and most probable opinion is that even under
the New Covenant, explicit faith in Christ, and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a
fortiori</foreign> in the Divine Trinity, cannot be regarded as an
indispensable medium of justification and salvation, (1)
because St. Paul does not mention these two dogmas in
the decisive passage, Heb. XI, 6; and (2) because a
supernatural act of justifying love and contrition may be
inspired by belief in the existence of God and divine
retribution; and (3) because this latter belief implicitly,
by way of desire (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides
in voto</foreign>), includes belief in Christ
and the Trinity.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>,
2a 2ae, qu. 2, art. 7, ad 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si
qui salvati fuerunt, quibus revelatio
non fuit facta, non fuerunt
salvati absque fide mediatoris, quia,
etsi non habuerunt fidem explicitam,
habuerunt tamen fidem implicitam
in divina providentia, credentes
Deum esse liberatorem hominum secundum
modos sibi placitos.</foreign></q></note> Nevertheless it must be held that an
adult who desires to be received into the Church and is
baptized in the name of the Most Holy Trinity, is bound
to believe in the Trinity and the Incarnation by more
than a mere <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas
praecepti</foreign>, namely, by what is technically
called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitas
medii per accidens</foreign>, a necessity
from which God dispenses only in exceptional cases,
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
when it is either physically or morally impossible to
elicit an act of explicit faith.<note place='foot'>The practical bearing of this
question on the heathens is treated
<hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>
sqq.</note> It is for this reason that
the Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office decided,
February 28, 1703, that missionaries are bound to explain
to all adult converts who have the use of reason, even
though they be near death, those mysteries of the faith
which are necessary for salvation
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>necessitate medii</foreign>, especially the Trinity
and the Incarnation.<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Missionarium
teneri adulto
etiam moribundo, qui incapax omnino
non sit, explicare fidei mysteria,
quae sunt necessaria necessitate
medii, ut sunt praecipue mysteria
Trinitatis et Incarnationis.</foreign></q> Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>Prop. Damn. ab Innocentio XI. a.</hi>
1679, prop. 64 (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1214). For a full explanation
of the topics treated in the present
Section consult Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Fide</hi>,
disp. 12, sect. 4; De Lugo, <hi rend='italic'>De Fide</hi>,
disp. 12, sect. 4 sq.; W. Liese, <hi rend='italic'>Der
heilsnotwendige Glaube</hi>, Freiburg
1902.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section 2. The Necessity Of Other Preparatory Acts
Besides Faith</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Heretical Errors and the Teaching of
the Church.</hi>&mdash;Martin Luther, to quiet his conscience,
evolved the notion that faith alone justifies
and that the Catholic doctrine of the necessity
of good works is pharisaical and derogatory to
the merits of Jesus Christ. This teaching was
incorporated into the symbolic books of the Lutherans<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>Solid. Declar.</hi>, art. 3:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Neque contritio neque dilectio
neque ulla virtus, sed sola fides
[=fiducia] est medium et instrumentum,
quo gratiam Dei, merita
Christi et remissionem peccatorum
apprehendere possumus.</foreign></q></note>
and adopted by Calvin.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Instit.</hi>,
III, 11, § 19: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dicimus
hominem solâ fide iustificari.</foreign></q> For
a classic exposition of the Lutheran
and Calvinistic views of faith, see
Möhler, <hi rend='italic'>Symbolik</hi>, § 16; English tr.
by James Burton Robertson, 5th ed.,
London 1906, pp. 124 sqq.</note> It has been
called one of the two basic errors of Protestantism.
The Tridentine Council solemnly
condemns it as follows: <q>If anyone saith that by
faith alone the impious is justified, in such wise as
to mean that nothing else is required to coöperate
in order to obtain the grace of justification, and
that it is not in any way necessary that he be prepared
and disposed by the movement of his own
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
will; let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI,
can. 9: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, solâ fide impium iustificari,
ita ut intelligat nihil aliud requiri
quod ad iustificationis gratiam consequendam
cooperetur et nullâ ex
parte necesse esse, eum suae voluntatis
motu praeparari atque disponi,
anathema sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 819.)</note> Other acts that
dispose or prepare the soul for justification, according
to the same Council, are: the fear of
divine justice; hope in God's mercy; charity,
which is the font of all righteousness; detestation
of sin, and penitence.<note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 6. The passage
is quoted <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Refutation of the Sola Fides Theory.</hi>&mdash;The
Lutheran theory involves an open rupture
with the traditional teaching of the Church and
is positively unscriptural. Luther himself felt
this, as appears from his interpolation of the word
<q>alone</q> in Rom. III, 28 and his rejection of the
entire canonical Epistle of St. James.<note place='foot'>He
contemptuously called it <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>ein
ströherne Epistel</foreign>,</q> a letter of straw.</note>
</p>

<p>
a) The teaching of the Bible in regard to the
rôle played by good works in the process of justification
may be summarized as follows:
</p>

<p>
(1) A man may believe all that the Church
teaches and yet be lost for want of good works
or because he has not the love of God; consequently,
faith alone does not justify or insure
eternal salvation. Our Divine Saviour Himself
declares: <q>Not every one that saith to me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but
he that doeth the will of my Father who is in
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Matth. VII, 21:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non omnis,
qui dicit mihi, Domine, Domine, intrabit
in regnum caelorum: sed qui
facit voluntatem Patris mei, qui in
caelis est, ipse intrabit in regnum
caelorum.</foreign></q></note> St. James says: <q>Do you not see
that by works a man is justified, and not by faith
only?</q><note place='foot'>Jas. II, 24:
<q><foreign rend='italic'>Videtis quoniam
ex operibus iustificatur homo, et non
ex fide tantum (ἐξ ἔργων δικαιοῦνται
ἄνθρωπος, καὶ οὐκ ἐκ πίστεως
μόνον).</foreign></q></note> And St. Paul: <q>If I should have all
faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have
not charity, I am nothing.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. XIII, 2:
<q><foreign rend='italic'>Et si habuero
omnem fidem (πάσαν τὴν πίστιν),
ita ut montes transferam, caritatem
(ἀγάπην) autem non habuero, nihil
sum.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
(2) Besides faith, justification requires certain
other preparatory or dispositive acts. There is,
for example, the fear of divine justice. Cfr.
Ecclus. I, 28: <q>He that is without fear cannot
be justified.</q><note place='foot'>Ecclus. I, 28:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Qui sine timore
est, non poterit iustificari.</foreign></q></note> Also, hope in God's mercy. Cfr.
Rom. VIII, 24: <q>For we are saved by hope.</q><note place='foot'>Rom.
VIII, 24: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Spe enim
salvi facti sumus.</foreign></q></note>
Again, charity. Cfr. Luke VII, 47: <q>Many
sins are forgiven her because she hath loved
much.</q><note place='foot'>Luke VII, 47: <q><foreign rend='italic'>Remittuntur
ei peccata multa, quoniam (ὅτι)
dilexit multum.</foreign></q></note> Furthermore, contrition or penitence.
Cfr. Luke XIII, 3: <q>Unless you shall do penance,
you shall all likewise perish.</q><note place='foot'>Luke XIII, 3:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nisi poenitentiam
habueritis, omnes similiter
peribitis.</foreign></q></note> Finally,
good works in general. Cfr. St. James II, 17:
<q>So faith also, if it have not works, is dead in
itself.</q><note place='foot'>Jac. II, 17:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fides, si non
habet opera, mortua est in semetipso.</foreign></q></note>
No one who ponders these and similar
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
texts can maintain, as Calvin and Melanchthon
did, that the good works mentioned merely accompany
justification, for they are unmistakably
described as causes which dispose and prepare the
sinner for it.
</p>

<p>
(3) It is not faith alone that justifies, but faith
informed and actuated by charity. Cfr. Gal. V, 6:
<q>For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth
anything, nor uncircumcision: but faith that
worketh by charity.</q><note place='foot'>Gal. V, 6:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In Christo Iesu
neque circumcisio aliquid valet
neque praeputium, sed fides quae per
caritatem operatur</foreign> (πίστις δι᾽ ἀγάπης
ἐνεργουμένη).</q></note> The Greek text shows
that the word <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>operatur</foreign> in the Vulgate must be
taken passively, so that a more correct translation
would be: <q>... but faith effected or formed by
charity.</q> But even if ἐνεργουμένη were used as a deponent
(ἐνεργεῖσθαι=<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>agere</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>operari</foreign>) the meaning
would be substantially the same, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> a dead faith,
without charity, avails nothing. Cfr. St. James
II, 26: <q>For even as the body without the spirit
is dead, so also faith without works is dead.</q><note place='foot'>Jac.
II, 26: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sicut enim corpus
sine spiritu mortuum est, ita et
fides sine operibus mortua est.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
In Rom. III, 28: <q>For we account a man to be justified
by faith, without the works of the law,</q><note place='foot'>Rom.
III, 28: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Arbitramur
enim hominem iustificari per fidem
sine operibus legis.</foreign></q></note> Luther
deliberately inserted the word <q>alone.</q> The context
shows that this is a falsification. The Apostle contrasts
justifying faith, not with those preparatory acts of salvation
which spring from it, but with the sterile <q>works of
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
the law</q> (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the Old Testament), which, as such,
possessed no more power to justify than the good works
of the heathen. Keeping this contrast in mind, it
would not be incorrect to say, and St. Paul might well
have said, that <q>supernatural faith alone (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> only) justifies,
while the works of the law do not.</q> But if faith
be taken in contradistinction to the other acts operative in
the process of justification, such as fear, hope, contrition,
love,&mdash;and this is the sense in which Luther takes it,&mdash;then
it is false and contrary to the mind of St. Paul to
say: <q>Faith alone justifies, nothing else is required.</q>
For in this sense faith is merely the beginning, the
foundation, the root of justification and cannot justify the
sinner until it has absorbed the other preparatory acts required
by Holy Scripture and transformed them into perfect
love. This fact was already pointed out by St. Augustine.
<q>Unintelligent persons,</q> he says, <q>with regard
to the Apostle's statement: <q>We conclude that a man is
justified by faith without the works of the law,</q> have
thought him to mean that faith is sufficient for a man,
even if he leads a bad life and has no good deeds to allege.
It is impossible that such a character should be
deemed <q>a vessel of election</q> by the Apostle, who, after
declaring that <q>in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth
anything nor uncircumcision,</q> adds the important
remark: <q>but faith that worketh by charity.</q> It is such
faith which separates the faithful children of God from
unclean devils,&mdash;for even these <q>believe and tremble,</q> as
the Apostle James says, but they do no good works.
Therefore they possess not the faith by which the just
man lives,&mdash;the faith which operates through love in
such wise that God recompenses it according to its works
with eternal life.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Fide et Lib. Arbitrio</hi>, c. 7, n. 18.</note>
</p>

<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>

<p>
There is another sense in which faith alone may be
said to justify, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: if the term be taken to include all
those things which God has ordained for our salvation,
that is to say, the sum-total of <q>revelation</q> or <q>the
true religion</q> as opposed to <q>heresy.</q> The term πίστις
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides</foreign>)
is sometimes employed in this sense by the Fathers,
but never in Sacred Scripture.<note place='foot'>On the misinterpretation of
other Scripture texts by the Reformers
see Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De Iustificatione</hi>,
I, 19-24.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) There is a unanimous and unbroken tradition
in favor of the Catholic doctrine. St. Polycarp
writes in his Epistle to the Philippians:
<q>... the faith (πίστις) given you, which is
the mother of us all when hope (ἐλπίς) follows
and love (ἀγάπη) goes before.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.
ad Philipp.</hi>, 3.</note> St. Augustine
teaches that while faith is <hi rend='italic'>per se</hi> separable
from hope and love, it is ineffective without them.
<q>Man begins with faith, but the demons, too, believe
and tremble; to faith, therefore, must be
added hope, and to hope, love.</q><note place='foot'>Serm.,
XVI, c. 6: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>A fide
incipit homo, sed et daemones credunt
et contremiscunt; adde ergo
fidei spem speique ipsi adde caritatem.</foreign></q></note> And again:
<q>Without love, faith can indeed exist, but it availeth
nothing.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Trinit.</hi>,
XXV, 18: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sine
caritate quippe fides potest quidem
esse, sed non et prodesse.</foreign></q></note> St. Gregory the Great, paraphrasing
St. James, says: <q>Perhaps some one will
say to himself: I have believed, I shall be saved.
He speaks truly if he sustains faith by works.
For that is true faith which does not contradict by
deeds what it asserts in words.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom.
in Evang.</hi>, 29: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fortasse unusquisque apud
semetipsum dicat: Ego iam credidi, salvus ero.
Verum dicit, si fidem operibus tenet.
Vera etenim fides est, quae in hoc
quod verbis dicit moribus non contradicit.</foreign></q>
As to the sense in which
some of the Fathers speak of faith
as the only thing that can save men,
cfr. Bellarmine <hi rend='italic'>De Iustificat.</hi>, I, 26.</note>
</p>

<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>

<p>
c) This teaching is in perfect conformity with
reason.
</p>

<p>
α) No supernatural enlightenment is needed
to perceive the intrinsic propriety of a moral preparation
for justification. Not only must the sinner
learn to know God as His supernatural end
and the source of all righteousness, but he must
also be persuaded that it is his duty, with the help
of sufficient grace, to direct his will towards this
final end.
</p>

<p>
Every tendency or movement presupposes a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>terminus
a quo</foreign>, from which it starts, and a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>terminus ad quem</foreign>,
to which it tends. The movement of the will in the
process of justification, besides faith, demands a voluntary
withdrawal from sin (contrition, good resolutions)
and an approach to righteousness (hope, love, desire).<note place='foot'>Cfr.
St. Thomas Aquinas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 113, art. 5:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Iustificatio impii est quidam motus,
quo humana mens movetur a Deo a
statu peccati in statum iustitiae....
Unde oportet quod mens humana,
dum iustificatur, per motum
liberi arbitrii recedat a peccato et accedat
ad iustitiam. Recessus autem
et accessus in motu liberi arbitru
accipitur secundum detestationem et
desiderium.... Oportet igitur quod
in iustificatione impii sit motus liberi
arbitrii duplex: unus quo per desiderium
tendat in Dei iustitiam, et
alius quo detestetur peccatum.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
This argument would have made no impression on
Luther, since he bluntly denied free-will in the moral order
and regarded human nature as so radically depraved
by original sin as to be incapable of coöperating with divine
grace. In fact he compared man to a <q>log, stick
or stone.</q> This view was shared by Amsdorf, Flacius,
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
and others, whereas Osiander and Butzer admitted that
<q>inherent righteousness</q> is at least a partial factor in justification.
Melanchthon, in an endeavor to reconcile the
contradictions of this discordant system, unwittingly gave rise to the so-called
Synergist dispute. When Pfeffinger<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Libertate
Voluntatis Humanae</hi>,
Leipzig 1555.</note>
undertook the defence of free-will, many Lutheran
theologians, especially of the University of Jena, boldly attacked
the log-stick-and-stone theory<note place='foot'><q><hi rend='italic'>Klotz-,
Stock- und Stein-theorie.</hi></q></note> and
tried to force their adversaries to admit that man is able
to coöperate with grace. The <q>Half-Melanchthonians,</q>
as they were called, succeeded in smuggling Synergism
into the <q>Book of Torgau;</q><note place='foot'><q><hi rend='italic'>Das
Torgische Buch</hi>,</q> A. D.
1576.</note> but before the <q>Formulary
of Concord</q> was finally printed in the monastery
of Bergen, near Magdeburg (A. D. 1577), the strict
Lutherans had eliminated that article as heterodox and
substituted for it the log-stick-and-stone theory as it
appears in the official symbols of the Lutheran Church.
In the Syncretist dispute, and through the efforts of
the Pietists, this harsh teaching was afterwards moderated.
But what probably contributed most to the
crumbling of the system was the rapid growth of Socinianism
and Rationalism among the Lutherans in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. To-day, with the
exception of a small band of <q>orthodox</q> Lutherans in
Saxony and the United States, Protestants no longer hold
the log-stick-and-stone theory. The school of Luther proclaimed
it as the distinguishing tenet of Protestantism, as <q>the criterion of a standing
or falling church,</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Articulus
stantis et cadentis
ecclesiae.</foreign></q> Cfr. Newman, <hi rend='italic'>Lectures
on Justification</hi>, p. 113.</note>&mdash;and
by this criterion the Lutheran Church has indeed fallen.
Common sense has led modern Protestants to admit that
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
contrition and penance are quite as necessary for justification as faith, an
opinion which, in the words of Dorner,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Geschichte
der protestantischen
Theologie</hi>, p. 583, München 1867.</note>
<q>comes dangerously near the Catholic system.</q> In
Scandinavia, according to Dr. Krogh-Tonning,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die
Gnadenlehre und die stille
Reformation</hi>, Christiania 1894. Not
long after writing this book Dr.
Krogh-Tonning became a Catholic.</note> the Lutheran
Church has experienced a <q>quiet reformation</q> and
now unconsciously defends the Catholic doctrine of justification.<note place='foot'>How
Luther came to adopt the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sola fides</foreign> theory is exhaustively
explained by H. Grisar, S. J.,
<hi rend='italic'>Luther</hi>, Vol. I, Freiburg 1911; English
tr., Vols. I and II, London 1913.
Cfr. also F. Hettinger, <hi rend='italic'>Die Krisis
des Christentums</hi>, pp. 72 sqq., Freiburg
1881.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) As the sufficiency of the Bible without
Tradition is the formal principle of <q>orthodox</q>
Protestantism, so justification by faith alone may
be said to be its material principle. The absurdity
of the Lutheran position is evident from
the fact that these two principles are mutually
destructive. So far from teaching justification
by faith alone, the Bible inculcates the exact contrary,
while its sufficiency as the source of faith
could be proved from its own pages, if at all, only
by a vicious circle.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle, art. on <q>Tradition</q>
in Herder's <hi rend='italic'>Kirchenlexikon</hi>,
2nd ed., Vol. XI, 1933 sqq., Freiburg
1899.</note> Thus the whole Protestant
system is based on contradiction.
</p>

<p>
The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sola fides</foreign>
theory is open to serious objection also
from the ethical point of view. It cannot be put into
practice without grave danger. <q>Sin lustily,</q> writes Luther, <q>but be yet
more lusty in faith.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pecca
fortiter, crede fortius.</foreign></q>
Cfr. Möhler, <hi rend='italic'>Symbolism</hi> (English
tr., p. 130).</note> The first
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
part at least of this injunction was promptly obeyed by
his followers, and the rapid deterioration of morals which
followed was but a natural sequel of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sola fides</foreign> theory.
If faith alone were sufficient for justification, it would
make no difference what kind of life a man led, for
unbelief, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the loss of fiduciary faith, would be the
only sin. No wonder this ethical antinomism of the
Lutheran system, so radically opposed to the teaching of
St. James, was rejected by Hugo Grotius, George Buller,
and other honest Protestants.
</p>

<p>
Another weighty objection against the Lutheran theory
of justification is that it disregards the law of causation.
According to Luther a man is justified by the firm belief
and trust that his sins are forgiven. This <q>belief</q>
is either true or false. If it is false, I can have no
certainty with regard to my salvation, but am deceiving
myself. If true, it presupposes that which it is to effect,
in other words, it puts the cause before the effect.
An orthodox Lutheran theologian of the old school would
probably retort: My sins are actually forgiven by virtue of
the atonement, because all men without exception are redeemed
through the merits of Jesus Christ. If this be
true, then why not be consistent and say: All men are
justified because all are redeemed, consequently there is
no need of faith and sacraments, and keeping the
commandments is a matter of indifference! It is at this
point that the incompatibility of Luther's teaching with
the Bible and sound ethics becomes most glaringly apparent.
True, Luther himself at times emphasized the necessity
of good works; but this merely proves that he had
lucid intervals when his honest nature rebelled against the
inconsistency of his teaching.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische
Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII,
§455, Mainz 1899. The <q>orthodox</q>
Lutheran teaching is strongly
stated by the famous convert Dr.
Edw. Preuss in his work, still regarded
as a classic by <q>orthodox</q>
Lutherans, <hi rend='italic'>Die Rechtfertigung des
Sünders vor Gott</hi>, Berlin 1868.</note>
</p>

<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>

<p>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Explanation of the Catholic Doctrine.</hi>&mdash;The
Council of Trent assigned to faith its
proper place in the process of justification,<note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap.
8.</note> and
gave a luminous and profound analysis of the
process itself.<note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 6.</note>
Scholastic theology, in elaborating
the teaching of Scripture and Tradition, drew
a distinction between <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides
formata</foreign>, which truly justifies, and
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides informis</foreign>, which falls short of
justification.
</p>

<p>
a) As regards the intrinsic relation of (dogmatic)
faith to other preparatory acts in the process of justification,
the Tridentine Council declares: <q>Faith is the
beginning of human salvation, the foundation and the
root of all justification.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI,
cap. 8: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fides est
humanae salutis initium, fundamentum
et radix omnis iustificationis.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 801.)</note> Supernatural faith, therefore,
is the beginning of salvation, and not, as Harnack makes
Luther say, <q>at once the beginning, the middle, and the
end,</q> because no man can be converted unless he has
believingly embraced God as his final goal. This faith is
preceded by certain preliminary conditions, of which the
first is an illumination of the intellect and a strengthening
of the will, which results in the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>affectus credulitatis</foreign>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>initia fidei</foreign>).
For justifying faith does not flash forth
suddenly, like a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>deus
ex machina</foreign>, but requires time for its development, as the history
of many conversions proves.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
Faith is called the <q>foundation</q> of justification because
it not only marks its beginning, but constitutes the
basis upon which all subsequent stages of the process rest.
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
To exclude the mistaken notion that the process of
justification is a series of mechanical and disconnected
acts, the Council calls faith the <q>root</q> of justification,
from which the other preparatory acts spring organically,
as the trunk of a tree from its root.
</p>

<p>
The psychological description of the whole process
given by the Tridentine Fathers, which even Harnack admits
to be <q>a masterly piece of work,</q> runs as follows:
<q>Now they [adults] are disposed unto justice when, excited
and assisted by divine grace, conceiving faith by
hearing, they are freely moved towards God, believing
those things to be true which God has revealed and
promised,&mdash;and this especially, that God justifies the impious
by His grace through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ; and when, understanding themselves to be
sinners, they, by turning themselves from the fear of
divine justice, whereby they are profitably agitated, to
consider the mercy of God, are raised unto hope, confiding
that God will be propitious to them for Christ's
sake; and they begin to love Him as the fountain of all
justice, and are therefore moved against sins by a certain
hatred and detestation, to wit: by that penitence
which must be performed before Baptism; lastly, when
they purpose to receive Baptism, to begin a new life, and
to keep the commandments of God....</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI,
cap. 6: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Disponuntur
autem ad ipsam iustitiam, dum
excitati divinâ gratiâ et adiuti, fidem
ex auditu concipientes, libere moventur
in Deum, credentes vera esse,
quae divinitus revelata et promissa
sunt, atque illud in primis, a Deo
iustificari impium per gratiam eius,
per redemptionem, quae est in
Christo Iesu, et dum peccatores se
esse intelligentes, a divinae iustitiae
timore, quo utiliter concutiuntur, ad
considerandam Dei misericordiam se
convertendo, in spem eriguntur fidentes,
Deum sibi propter Christum
propitium fore, illumque tamquam
omnis iustitiae fontem diligere incipiunt:
ac propterea moventur adversus
peccata per odium aliquod et
detestationem, hoc est, per eam poenitentiam,
quam ante baptismum agi
oportet: denique dum proponunt suscipere
baptismum, inchoare novam
vitam et servare divina mandata.</foreign></q></note> The four
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
ordinary stages in the process of justification, therefore,
are: (1) From faith to fear of divine justice; (2) from fear to hope; (3) from
hope to initial love;<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Diligere
incipiunt.</foreign></q> (<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>)</note> (4) from
initial love to contrition and a firm purpose of
amendment.<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Contritio cum proposito
novae vitae.</foreign></note> If contrition is dictated and transfused
by perfect love,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Contritio
caritate perfecta.</foreign></note> and the sinner has an explicit or at least implicit
desire for the Sacrament,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Votum
sacramenti, sacramentum
in voto.</foreign></note> justification takes
place at once. If, on the other hand, the sinner's sorrow
is imperfect (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>attritio</foreign>),
he attains justification only by
actual reception of the Sacrament (Baptism or Penance).<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trid.</hi>, Sess. VI, cap.
4 and 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) Does conversion always follow this conciliary
schema? No. The Council did not mean to define that
these acts must follow one another in strict sequence or
that they are one and all absolutely indispensable for justification.
It is certain, however, that the process invariably
begins with faith and ends with contrition accompanied
by a firm purpose of amendment. In exceptional
cases (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the Prodigal Son, Mary Magdalen) perfect
charity seems immediately to follow faith, and
may then be said virtually to include the intermediate
stages of fear, hope, and contrition. Yet this is not the
usual way. Ordinarily faith elicits fear, which in turn
produces two kinds of hope&mdash;hope of forgiveness
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>spes veniae</foreign>)
and hope in God (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>spes theologica</foreign>), which marks
the beginning of charity (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>amor
concupiscentiae</foreign>). Contrition is always a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>conditio sine qua non</foreign>, because there
can be no forgiveness of sin without sorrow for it.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Ez. XVIII, 30; Joel II, 12;
Luke XIII, 3; Acts II, 38. Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trid.</hi>, Sess. XIV, cap. 4:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Contritio, quae primum locum inter
dictos poenitentis actus habet, animi
dolor ac detestatio est de peccato
commisso cum proposito non peccandi
de cetero. Fuit autem quovis
tempore ad impetrandam veniam peccatorum
hic contritionis motus necessarius.</foreign></q></note> It
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
is for this reason that, according to St. Thomas, explicit
contrition for mortal sins is necessary for justification
even when there is perfect charity, and the sufficiency of
the so-called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>poenitentia
virtualis</foreign> is limited to venial offenses
and such grievous sins as cannot be remembered.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>, 3a, qu. 87,
art. 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Exigitur autem ad remissionem
peccati mortalis perfectior
poenitentia, ut scil. homo actualiter
pecoatum mortale commissum detestetur,
quantum in ipso est, ut scil.
diligentiam adhibeat ad memorandum
singula peccata mortalia, ut singula
detestetur. Sed hoc non requiritur
ad remissionem venialium peccatorum....
Unde sequitur quod requiratur
quaedam virtualis displicentia, ...
quod tamen non sufficit ad remissionem
peccati mortalis, nisi
quantum ad peccata oblita post diligentem
inquisitionem.</foreign></q></note>
Fear, while not absolutely indispensable, is seldom absent.
Holy Scripture tells us that <q>the fear of God is the beginning
of wisdom,</q> and it is natural for the sinner seeking
forgiveness to detest his sins out of fear of divine
justice before he attains to the motive of perfect charity.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Inst. Theol.</hi>, Vol.
III, pp. 204 sqq., Paris 1896.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) Certain utterances of Scripture and the Fathers with regard to the possibility
of a <q>dead</q> faith<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fides
mortua</foreign> in contradistinction
to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides viva</foreign>.</note> have led
theologians to distinguish between <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides
informis</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides
formata</foreign>. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fides informis</foreign>
is a dead faith, devoid of charity,
and without justifying power. The only faith that
can justify a man is that which is animated by charity and
productive of good works.<note place='foot'>Gal. V, 6.</note>
This is the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides formata</foreign> of
the Schoolmen, which includes all the preparatory acts
enumerated by the Tridentine Council, from fear to perfect
charity. These acts, however, though united in the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides formata</foreign>,
retain their respective independence, and
can disappear singly, one after another, as they came.
Zwingli's assertion that faith, hope, and charity are identical,
or at least inseparable, has been expressly condemned
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
by the Tridentine Council: <q>If any one saith that,
grace being lost through sin, faith also is always lost with
it; or that the faith which remains, though it be no live
faith, is not a true faith; or that he who has faith without charity is not a
Christian; let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Trid.</hi>, Sess. VI, can. 28:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis dixerit, amissâ per peccatum
gratiâ simul et fidem semper
amitti aut fidem, quae remanet, non
esse veram fidem, licet non sit viva,
aut eum qui fidem sine caritate habet,
non esse Christianum, anathema sit.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 838.) The
Scriptural argument for this thesis
is developed by Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De
Iustificatione</hi>, I, 15.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Readings</hi>:&mdash;Besides the respective chapters in the various
text-books, the student may consult: *A. Vega, <hi rend='italic'>De Iustificatione
Doctrina Universa Libris XV Absolute Tradita</hi>, Venice 1548
(reprinted at Cologne, 1572).&mdash;*Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De Iustificatione
Impii</hi>, 1. V (ed. Fèvre, Vol. VI, pp. 149 sqq. Paris 1873).&mdash;*Suarez,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, 1. VI sqq.&mdash;Becanus, <hi rend='italic'>Theol.
Scholast.</hi>, <q><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Habituali</hi>,</q> Rouen 1658.&mdash;L. Nussbaum, <hi rend='italic'>Die Lehre der
kath. Kirche über die Rechtfertigung</hi>, München 1837.&mdash;C. von
Schätzler, <hi rend='italic'>Neue Untersuchungen über das Dogma von der Gnade
und das Wesen des christl. Glaubens</hi>, Mainz 1867.&mdash;Oswald, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Lehre von der Heiligung</hi>, § 5, 3rd ed., Paderborn 1885.&mdash;B. Bartmann,
<hi rend='italic'>St. Paulus und St. Jakobus und die Rechtfertigung</hi>, Freiburg
1897.&mdash;L. Galey, <hi rend='italic'>La Foi et les Oeuvres</hi>, Montauban
1902.&mdash;W. Liese, <hi rend='italic'>Der heilsnotwendige Glaube, sein Begriff und
Inhalt</hi>, Freiburg 1902.&mdash;Card. Newman, <hi rend='italic'>Lectures on the
Doctrine of Justification</hi>, 8th impression, London 1900.&mdash;Hugh Pope, O. P., art.
<q>Faith</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic Encyclopedia</hi>, Vol. V.&mdash;J.
Mausbach, <hi rend='italic'>Catholic Moral Teaching and its Antagonists</hi> (tr. by A.
M. Buchanan), pp. 150 sqq., New York 1914.&mdash;L. Labauche, S. S., <hi rend='italic'>God
and Man</hi>, pp. 203 sqq., N. Y. 1916.
</p>

<p>
On the teaching of the Reformers cfr. *Möhler, <hi rend='italic'>Symbolik</hi>,
§ 18 sqq., 11th ed., Mainz 1890 (English tr. by James Burton
Robertson, pp. 82 sqq., 5th ed., London 1906); Ad. Harnack,
<hi rend='italic'>Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte</hi>, Vol. III, 4th ed., Freiburg 1910;
Denifle-Weiss, O. P., <hi rend='italic'>Luther und Luthertum in der ersten
Entwicklung</hi>, Vol. II, Mainz 1909; H. Grisar, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>Luther</hi>,
Vol. I, Freiburg 1911 (English tr., Vols. I and II, London 1913).
</p>
</quote>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The State Of Justification</head>

<p>
Though the term <q>justification</q> may be extended to
the preparatory acts that lead up to the state of justice,
strictly speaking it signifies only that decisive moment in
which the sinner is cleansed from mortal sin by an infusion
of sanctifying grace. Hence a careful distinction
must be made between justification as an act
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actus iustificationis</foreign>)
and justification as an habitual state (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus
iustificationis s. status gratiae sanctificantis</foreign>). The transient
act introduces a permanent state, just as the Sacrament
of Holy Orders constitutes a man in the sacerdotal
state or priesthood.
</p>

<p>
Both as an act and as a state justification possesses
three distinct properties; it is uncertain, unequal, and
capable of being lost.
</p>

<p>
This gives us the basis for a division of the
present Chapter into three Sections: (1) On
the Nature of Justification, (2) On Justifying, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
Sanctifying Grace, and (3) On the Properties of
that Grace.
</p>

<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Section 1. The Nature Of Justification</head>

<p>
Justification in the active sense
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>iustificatio</foreign>,
δικαίωσις) is defined by the Tridentine Council as
<q>a translation from that state wherein man is born
a child of the first Adam, to the state of grace and
of the adoption of the sons of God through the second
Adam, Jesus Christ, our Saviour.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Trid.</hi>, Sess. VI, cap. 4:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Iustificatio impii [est] translatio
ab eo statu, in quo homo nascitur
filius primi Adae, in statum gratiae
et adoptionis filiorum Dei per secundum
Adam Iesum Christum Salvatorem
nostrum.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 796.)</note>
</p>

<p>
Justification, therefore, has both a negative and a
positive element. The positive element is interior sanctification
through the merits of Jesus Christ. The negative
element consists in the forgiveness of sin. Though
these elements are objectively inseparable, the forgiveness
of sin being practically an effect of interior sanctification,
yet we must treat them separately in order to be
able to refute more effectively the Lutheran heresy that
sin is not wiped out but merely <q>covered,</q> and that justification
consists in an external <q>imputation</q> of the righteousness
of Christ.
</p>

<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_1_Article_1'/>
<head>Article 1. The Negative Element Of Justification</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Heresy of the Protestant Reformers
and the Teaching of the Church.</hi>&mdash;Luther
held that human nature was radically depraved
by original sin<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 221 sq.</note> and that justification consists
in this, that sin (original and mortal) is no
longer <q>imputed</q> to the sinner; that is to say,
it is not blotted out but merely <q>covered</q> by the
merits of Christ.
</p>

<p>
a) Forgiveness of sins, therefore, according to Luther,
consists simply in their being no longer imputed.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
the second on the list of
Lutheran propositions condemned by
Leo X, A. D. 1520: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In puero
post baptismum negare remanens
peccatum est Paulum et Christum
simul conculcare.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 742.)</note> This
heresy was incorporated in the Formula of Concord and other symbolical books
of the Lutheran Church,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Form. Conc.</hi>,
p. 2, c. 3:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quando autem docemus, quod per
operationem Spiritus Sancti regeneramur
et iustificamur, non ita accipiendum
est quod iustificatis et renatis
nulla prorsus iniustitia substantiae
ipsorum et conversationi adhaereat,
sed quod Christus perfectissimâ
obedientiâ suâ omnia ipsorum peccata
tegat, quae quidem in ipsa
natura infixa haerent. Nihilominus
tamen per fidem propter obedientiam
Christi boni et iusti pronuntiantur
et reputantur, etiamsi ratione corruptae
naturae suae sint maneantque
peccatores, dum mortale hoc corpus
circumferunt.</foreign></q></note> and subsequently
adopted by Calvin.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Antid. Conc.
Trid.</hi>, ad Sess. V:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Manet vere peccatum in nobis
neque per baptismum statim uno die
extinguitur.</foreign></q> Cfr. Möhler, <hi rend='italic'>Symbolik</hi>,
§ 14 (Robertson's translation,
5th ed., pp. 110 sqq.).</note>
</p>

<p>
b) The Catholic Church has always maintained
that justification is a renewal of the soul by which
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
a man's sins are blotted out and he becomes truly
just. This applies first of all to original sin.
<q>If,</q> says the Council of Trent, <q>anyone denies
that by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
is conferred in Baptism, the guilt of original sin
is remitted, or even asserts that the whole of that
which has the true and proper nature of sin is not
taken away, but says that it is only raised or not
imputed, let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Trid.</hi>, Sess. V, can. 5:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis per Iesu Christi D. N.
gratiam, quae in baptismate confertur,
reatum originalis peccati remitti
negat aut etiam asserit, non tolli
totum id quod veram et propriam
peccati rationem habet, sed illud dicit
tantum radi aut non imputari, anathema
sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 792.)</note> What it here
defines in regard to original sin, the Council elsewhere
reaffirms in respect of mortal sin.<note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 14; Sess. XIV,
cap. 2. See Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>The Sacraments</hi>,
Vol. II, <hi rend='italic'>Penance</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Refutation of the Lutheran Theory.</hi>&mdash;The
theory thus solemnly condemned by the Tridentine
Fathers is unscriptural and opposed to
Catholic Tradition.
</p>

<p>
a) The teaching of the Bible on this point may
be reduced to four distinct heads.
</p>

<p>
(1) The remission of sin granted in the process of
justification is a real annihilation of guilt; that is to
say, the sins remitted cease to exist in the moral (though
not, of course, in the historical) order. Cfr. Ps. L, 3:
<q>Have mercy on me, O God, according to thy great
mercy; and according to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my
iniquity.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dele
iniquitatem meam.</foreign></q></note> Is. XLIII, 25: <q>I am
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
he that blot out thy iniquities.</q><note place='foot'>Is. XLIII, 25:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ego sum ipse,
qui deleo iniquitates tuas.</foreign></q></note> After God has blotted
out a sin, it no longer exists. Cfr. Is. XLIV, 22: <q>I
have blotted out thy iniquities as a cloud, and thy sins
as a mist.</q><note place='foot'>Is. XLIV, 22:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Delevi ut
nubem iniquitates tuas et quasi
nebulam peccata tua.</foreign></q></note> Acts III, 19: <q>Be penitent, therefore,
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out.</q><note place='foot'>Acts III,
19: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Poenitemini
igitur et convertimini, ut deleantur
peccata vestra.</foreign></q></note>
Elsewhere God is said to <q>take away</q> sin. Cfr. 2
Kings XII, 13: <q>The Lord also hath taken away thy
sin.</q><note place='foot'>2 Kings XII, 13: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dominus
quoque transtulit peccatum tuum.</foreign></q></note> 1 Paral. XXI, 8: <q>I beseech
thee, take away the iniquity of thy servant.</q><note place='foot'>1 Paral. XXI, 8:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Obsecro,
aufer iniquitatem servi tui.</foreign></q></note> When He takes away
sin, it is really and truly blotted out. Cfr. Mich. VII,
18 sq.: <q>Who is a God like to thee, who takest away iniquity?...
He will put away our iniquities, and he will
cast all our sins into the bottom of the sea.</q><note place='foot'>Mich. VII, 18 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quis,
Deus, similis tui, qui aufers iniquitatem?...
Deponet [Deus] iniquitates
nostras et proiiciet in profundum
maris omnia peccata nostra.</foreign></q></note> Ps. X,
15: <q>His sin shall be sought, and shall not be found.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. X, 15:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quaeretur peccatum
illius, et non invenietur.</foreign></q></note>
Ps. CII, 12: <q>As far as the east is from the west, so
far hath he removed our iniquities from us.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. CII, 12:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quantum distat
ortus ab occidente, longe fecit a
nobis iniquitates nostras.</foreign></q></note> Consequently,
when our Divine Saviour said of Mary Magdalen:
<q>Many sins are forgiven her,</q><note place='foot'>Luke VII, 47:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Remittuntur
ei peccata multa.</foreign></q></note> He meant that
her sins were completely blotted out and taken away.
</p>

<p>
(2) Justification washes the soul from iniquity and
purifies the heart. Cfr. Ps. L, 4: <q>Wash me yet more
from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. L, 4:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Amplius lava me
ab iniquitate mea et a peccato
meo munda me.</foreign></q></note> Is. I,
16: <q>Wash yourselves, be clean.</q><note place='foot'>Is. I, 16:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Lavamini, mundi
estote.</foreign></q></note> After one's sins are
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
washed away, the heart is clean and pure. Cfr. Ez.
XXXVI, 25 sq.: <q>And I will pour upon you clean water,
and you shall be cleansed from all your filthiness, ...
and I will give you a new heart.</q><note place='foot'>Ez. XXXVI, 25 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Effundam
super vos aquam mundam et
mundabimini ab omnibus inquinamentis
vestris.... Et dabo vobis
cor novum.</foreign></q></note> 1 Cor. VI, 11:
<q>And such [fornicators, etc.] some of you were; but
you are washed, but you are sanctified, but you are
justified.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. VI, 11:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et haec
quidam [fornicarii etc.] fuistis, sed
abluti estis, sed sanctificati estis, sed
iustificati estis.</foreign></q></note> Spotless purity takes the place of the impurity
that previously defiled the soul of the sinner.
Cfr. Ps. L, 9: <q>Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and
I shall be cleansed: thou shalt wash me, and I shall be
made whiter than snow.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. L, 9:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Asperges me hyssopo
et mundabor, lavabis me et super
nivem dealbabor.</foreign></q></note> Is. I, 18: <q>If your sins be
as scarlet, they shall be made as white as snow: and if
they be red as crimson, they shall be white as wool.</q><note place='foot'>Is. I, 18:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si fuevint peccata
vestra ut coccinum, quasi nix dealbabuntur,
et si fuerint rubra quasi
vermiculus, velut lana alba erunt.</foreign></q></note>
No trace of sin remains in the soul after it has
been washed in the Precious Blood of Christ. Apoc. I,
5: <q>... Jesus Christ, ... hath loved us, and washed
us from our sins in his own blood.</q><note place='foot'>Apoc. I, 5:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... dilexit nos
et lavit nos a peccatis nostris in sanguine
suo.</foreign></q></note> 1 John I, 7:
<q>... the blood of Jesus Christ ... cleanseth us from
all sin.</q><note place='foot'>1 John I, 7:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sanguis Iesu
Christi ... emundat nos ab omni
peccato.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
(3) Justification is an awakening of the sinner from
death to life, a transition from darkness to light. Cfr.
1 John III, 14: <q>We know that we have passed from
death to life, because we love the brethren; he that loveth
not, abideth in death.</q><note place='foot'>1 John III, 14:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Translati
sumus de morte ad vitam, quoniam
diligimus fratres: qui non diligit,
manet in morte.</foreign></q></note> Col. II, 13: <q>And you, when
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
you were dead in your sins, ... he hath quickened together
with him, forgiving you all offences.</q><note place='foot'>Col. II, 13:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et vos, quum
mortui essetis in delictis, ... convivificavit
cum illo donans vobis
omnia delicta.</foreign></q></note> Eph. V,
8: <q>For you were heretofore darkness, but now light in
the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Eph. V, 8:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Eratis enim aliquando
tenebrae, nunc autem lux in
Domino.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
(4) Baptism, in particular, completely removes all
guilt. Cfr. Acts XXII, 16: <q>Rise up, and be baptized,
and wash away thy sins.</q><note place='foot'>Acts XXII, 16:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Exsurge et
baptizare et ablue peccata tua.</foreign></q></note> Hence, though concupiscence
remains, the soul has no longer in it anything
damnable, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> any trace of original or mortal sin. Cfr.
Rom. VIII, 1: <q>There is now therefore no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. VIII, 1:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nihil ergo
nunc damnationis est iis, qui sunt
in Christo Iesu.</foreign></q> Cfr. on this point
the dogmatic treatise on the Sacrament
of Baptism.</note>
</p>

<p>
It requires no special acuteness to perceive that
this Biblical teaching is irreconcilably opposed to
the Protestant theory of non-imputation. If, as
the Lutherans allege, God merely <emph>declared</emph> the believer
just, justification would not blot out or
take away sin, nor could it be truthfully said
that light and life take the place of death and
darkness; something deserving of condemnation
would still remain in those that are in Christ
Jesus.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Becanus, <hi rend='italic'>Theol. Scholast.</hi>,
P. II, tr. 5, cap. 1, qu. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
There are a few Scriptural texts that seem to favor
the Lutheran view, but they must be interpreted in conformity
with the general teaching of the Bible as outlined
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
above. Among these texts is Ps. XXXI, 1 sq.:
<q>Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom
the Lord hath not imputed sin, and in whose spirit there
is no guile.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. XXXI, 1 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Beati
quorum remissae sunt iniquitates et
quorum tecta sunt peccata; beatus
vir cui non imputavit Dominus peccatum
nec est in spiritu eius dolus.</foreign></q></note>
The parallelism apparent in this verse
allows us to conclude that <q>covered</q> is used in the
sense of <q>remitted</q> and that <q>he to whom the Lord
hath not imputed sin</q> is identical with the man <q>in
whose spirit there is no guile.</q> The text manifestly
refers to a real <emph>forgiveness</emph> of sins, for any sin that God
<q>covers</q> and ceases to <q>impute,</q> must be blotted out
and swept away, because <q>all things are naked and open
to the eyes</q> of the omniscient Creator.<note place='foot'>Heb. IV, 13.
Cfr. St. Augustine,
<hi rend='italic'>Enarr. in Ps.</hi>, II, 31, n. 12:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus tegat vulnera, noli tu. Nam
si tu tegere volueris erubescens,
medicus non curabit. Medicus tegat
et curet; emplastro enim tegit. Sub
tegmine medici curatur vulnus, sub
tegmine vulnerati celatur vulnus.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
Another favorite text of the Lutheran theologians is
Rom. VII, 17: <q>Now then it is no more I that do it, but
sin that dwelleth in me.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. VII, 17:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nunc autem
iam non ego operor illud, sed quod
habitat in me peccatum.</foreign></q></note> This passage clearly refers
to concupiscence, which remains in the sinner after
justification, but, according to Rom. VIII, 1 and James
I, 14 sq., is not truly and properly sin but merely called
<q>sin</q><note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Peccatum</foreign>,
ἁμαρτία.</note> by metonymy, <q>because,</q> in the words of the
Tridentine Council, <q>it is of sin and inclines to sin.</q><note place='foot'>Sess.
V, can. 5: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... ex
peccato est et ad peccatum inclinat.</foreign></q>
Cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 242 sqq., 261 sqq. On Jas. I,
14 sq., St. Augustine observes:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Profecto in his verbis partus a
pariente discernitur. Pariens enim
est concupiscentia, partus peccatum.
Sed concupiscentia non parit nisi
conceperit, nec concipit nisi illexerit,
h. e. ad malum perpetrandum obtinuerit
volentis assensum. Quod
ergo adversus eam dimicamur, hoc
agitur, ne concipiat pariatque peccatum.</foreign></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Contra Iulian.</hi>, VI, 15, 47.)
For a more exhaustive discussion of
this subject see Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De
Justif.</hi>, II, 9.</note>
</p>

<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>

<p>
b) The Fathers of the Church, both Greek and
Latin, unanimously teach that justification effects
the forgiveness of sins.
</p>

<p>
St. Justin Martyr says: <q>By doing penance, all who
desire it can obtain mercy from God, and Scripture calls
them blessed in saying: <q>Blessed is he to whom God hath
not imputed sin,</q> which means that he receives forgiveness
of his sins from God, not as you, deceiving yourselves,
and others like you aver, that God does not impute [their] sin to
them, though they are [still] sinners.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Dial.
c. Tryph.</hi>, n. 141.</note>
Clement of Alexandria likens Baptism to <q>a bath in
which sins are washed off.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi>,
l. II.</note> St. Gregory Nazianzen
says: <q>It is called Baptism [βαπτισμός, from βάπτειν, to
immerse] because the sin is buried in water, ... and a bath (λουτρόν),
because it washes off.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi>,
40.</note> St. Augustine
indignantly opposes the erroneous opinion of the Pelagians
that Baptism does not take away sins but merely
<q>trims them off.</q> <q>Who but an unbeliever,</q> he exclaims,
<q>can affirm this against the Pelagians? We say,
therefore, that Baptism gives remission of all sins and
takes away crimes, not merely trims them off
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>radere</foreign>)
in such wise that the roots of all sins may be preserved
in an evil flesh, as of hair trimmed on the head, when
the sins cut down may grow again.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra
Duas Epistolas Pelagian.</hi>,
I, 13, 26: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quis hoc adversus
Pelagianos nisi infidelis affirmet?
Dicimus ergo baptisma dare omnium
indulgentiam peccatorum et auferre
crimina, non radere; nec ut omnium
peccatorum radices in mala carne
teneantur, quasi rasorum in capite
capillorum, unde crescunt iterum
resecanda peccata.</foreign></q></note> Pope St.
Gregory the Great seems almost to have foreseen the
heresy of the Protestant Reformers, for he says: <q>But
if there are any who say that in Baptism sins are forgiven
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
as to outward appearance only, what can be more
un-Catholic than such preaching?... He who says that
sins are not completely forgiven in Baptism might as
well say that the Egyptians did not perish in the Red
Sea. But if he admits that the Egyptians actually died
[in the Red Sea], let him also admit that of necessity
sins completely die in Baptism.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>,
l. II, ep. 45: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si qui
vero sunt qui dicunt, peccata in
baptismate superficie tenus dimitti,
quid est hac praedicatione infidelius?...
Qui dicit peccata in
baptismate funditus non dimitti,
dicat in mari rubro Aegyptios non
veraciter mortuos. Si autem fatetur,
Aegyptios veraciter mortuos, fateatur
necesse est, peccata in baptismate
funditus mori.</foreign></q> Other confirmatory
texts <hi rend='italic'>apud</hi> Alb. a Bulsano,
<hi rend='italic'>Instit. Theol. Dogmat. Specialis</hi>,
ed. P. Gottfr. a Graun, O.
Cap., Vol. II, pp. 226 sq., Innsbruck
1894.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) The theological argument may be briefly formulated
as follows: We can imagine but two reasons why
God should not truly forgive us our sins in the process
of justification: inability and unwillingness. To say that
He is <emph>unable</emph> to forgive us our sins would be to assert
that the remission of sin involves a metaphysical impossibility.
This no Protestant will admit, because all
believe that <q>nothing defiled shall enter into heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Apoc.
XXI, 27: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non intrabit
in coelum aliquod coinquinatum.</foreign></q></note>
To assert that God is <emph>unwilling</emph> to forgive our sins would
be to contradict the plain teaching of Scripture, as set
forth above. Consequently there is no reason whatever
for assuming that God does not truly forgive us our sins
in the process of justification. Furthermore, it would
be incompatible with His veracity and holiness to assume
that He merely declares the sinner to be <q>free from sin,</q>
without actually cleansing his soul. It would be a contradiction
to assert that a man whom the truthful and all-holy
God has declared free from sin, remains steeped in
iniquity. Cfr. Prov. XVII, 15: <q>He that justifieth the
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
wicked [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> absolves him from his sins], and he that condemneth
the just, both are abominable before God.</q>
</p>

<p>
According to Revelation the justification of the sinner
is not a mere change, with a privation for its
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>terminus a
quo</foreign><note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Privatio</foreign>,
στέρησις.</note> and an indifferent form for its
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>terminus ad quem</foreign>,
but involves a movement from extreme to extreme, and
hence the genesis of the one extreme must coincide with
the destruction of the other. Sin, being in contrary opposition
to righteousness, must depart when righteousness
enters the soul.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>De Veritate</hi>,
qu. 28, art. 1 sqq.; <hi rend='smallcaps'>Idem</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 113, art. 2.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_1_Article_2'/>
<head>Article 2. The Positive Element Of Justification</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Heretical Errors and the Church.</hi>&mdash;Calvin
held that justification consists essentially
and exclusively in the remission of sins.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De Iustificatione</hi>,
II, 1 and 6.</note> The
other <q>Reformers</q> maintained that there must
also be a positive element in the process, but
differed in determining its nature.
</p>

<p>
a) The ambiguous language employed by Luther and
Melanchthon gave rise to many different opinions,
which agreed only in one point, that is, in holding,
contrary to Catholic teaching, that the positive element
of justification is not inward sanctification or inherent
righteousness (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> sanctifying grace). Probably
the view most common among the supporters of
the Augsburg Confession was that the sinner, by a
<q>fiduciary apprehension</q> of God's mercy, as proclaimed
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
in the Gospel, <q>apprehends</q> the extrinsic justice of
Christ, and with it covers his sins, which are thereupon
no longer <q>imputed</q> to him. In other words,
he is outwardly accounted and declared righteous in
the sight of God, though inwardly he remains a sinner.
With the exception of <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sola
fides</foreign></q> there was probably no
shibboleth in the sixteenth century so persistently
dinned into the ears of Catholics and Protestants alike
as <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>iustitia Christi
extra nos</foreign>.</q> It is found in the
<hi rend='italic'>Apologia</hi> written in defence of the Augsburg
Confession<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Apol. Confess. August.</hi>, c. 3,
art. 6: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Iustificare veto hoc loco
(Rom. VIII, 1) forensi consuetudine
significat reum absolvere et
pronuntiare iustum, sed propter
alienam iustitiam, videl. Christi, quae
aliena iustitia nobis communicatur
per fidem.</foreign></q></note>
and recurs in the Formula of Concord.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Solida
Declar.</hi>, III, <q><hi rend='italic'>De Fide
Iustif.</hi>,</q> § 11: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vocabulum iustificationis
in hoc negotio significat
iustum pronuntiare, a peccatis et
aeternis peccatorum suppliciis absolvere
propter iustitiam Christi, quae
a Deo fidei imputatur.</foreign></q></note> According to
the <q>orthodox</q> Lutheran view, therefore, justification
on its positive side is a purely forensic and outward
imputation of the righteousness of Christ, which the
sinner seizes with the arm of faith and puts on like a cloak
to hide the wounds of his soul.<note place='foot'>The Lutheran doctrine is fully
and lucidly set forth by Dr. Edward
Preuss in his work, <hi rend='italic'>Die Rechtfertigung
des Sünders vor Gott</hi> (Berlin
1868), which he retracted at his
conversion, in 1872. Cfr. also Newman's
<hi rend='italic'>Lectures on Justification</hi>, Lecture
I (8th impression, London
1900).</note>
</p>

<p>
b) Against this dismal heresy the Tridentine
Council solemnly declared that <q>Justification ...
is not remission of sins merely, but also the
sanctification and renewal of the inward man
through the voluntary reception of the grace and
of the gifts,</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 7:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Iustificatio
non est sola peccatorum remissio,
sed et sanctificatio et renovatio interioris
hominis per voluntariam susceptionem
gratiae et donorum....</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 799.)</note> and anathematized all those
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
who say that <q>men are justified either by
the sole imputation of the justice of Christ or by
the sole remission of sins, to the exclusion of the
grace and the charity which is poured forth in
their hearts by the Holy Ghost and is inherent in
them, or even that the grace whereby we are
justified is only the favor of God.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 11:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, homines iustificari vel solâ
imputatione iustitiae Christi vel solâ
peccatorum remissione, exclusâ gratiâ
et caritate, quae in cordibus eorum
per Spiritum Sanctum diffundatur
atque illis inhaereat, aut etiam gratiam
quâ iustificamur esse tantum
favorem Dei, anathema sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 821.)</note>
</p>

<p>
In thus defining the doctrine of the Church, the Council
did not, however, mean to deny that the sinner is
in a true sense <q>justified by the justice of Christ,</q>&mdash;in
so far namely, as our Lord has merited for us the
grace of justification. He merely wished to emphasize the
fact that a sinner is not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>formaliter</foreign>
justified by the imputation of Christ's justice. For the sake of greater clearness
the various <q>causes</q> of justification are enumerated
as follows: <q>Of this justification the causes are these:
the final cause indeed is the glory of God and of Jesus
Christ, and life everlasting; while the efficient cause is
a merciful God, who washes and sanctifies gratuitously; ...
but the meritorious cause is His most beloved only-begotten
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, who ... merited
justification for us by His most holy Passion on the
wood of the Cross; ... the instrumental cause is the
Sacrament of Baptism, which is the sacrament of faith,
without which no man was ever justified; lastly, the
sole formal cause is the justice of God, not that whereby
He Himself is just, but that whereby He maketh us
just, that, to wit, with which we being endowed are renewed
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
in the spirit of our mind, and are not only
reputed, but are truly called, and are, just.</q><note place='foot'>Sess.
VI, cap. 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Huius iustificationis
causae sunt: formalis
quidem gloria Dei et Christi ac vita
aeterna; efficiens vero misericors
Deus, qui gratuito abluit et sanctificat; ...
meritoria autem dilectissimus
Unigenitus suus D. N. Iesus
Christus, qui ... suâ sanctissimâ
passione in ligno crucis nobis iustificationem
meruit; ... instrumentalis
item sacramentum baptismi,
quod est sacramentum fidei, sine quâ
nulli unquam contigit iustificatio;
demum unica formalis causa est
iustitia Dei, non quâ ipse iustus est,
sed quâ nos iustos facit, quâ videl.
ab eo donati renovamur spiritu mentis
nostrae et non modo reputamur,
sed vere iusti nominamur et sumus.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 799).</note>
</p>

<p>
So important did the distinction between the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa
meritoria</foreign> and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa formalis</foreign> of
justification appear to the Fathers of Trent, that they made it the subject
of a separate canon, to wit: <q>If anyone saith that men
are just without the justice of Christ, whereby He
merited for us to be justified; or that it is by that justice
itself that they are formally just; let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess.
VI, can. 10: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, homines sine Christi iustitia,
per quam nobis meruit iustificari aut
per eam ipsam formaliter iustos esse,
anathema sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 820.)</note>
Justification in the Catholic sense, therefore, is
not a mere outward imputation of the justice of Christ,
but a true inward renewal and sanctification wrought by
a grace intrinsically inhering in the soul. This grace
theologians call the <q>grace of justification.</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_1_Article_2_No_2'/>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Refutation of the Lutheran Theory of
Imputation.</hi>&mdash;Nothing is so foreign to both the
spirit and the letter of Holy Scripture as the idea
that justification merely covers a man's sins with
a cloak of justice and leaves him unsanctified
within.
</p>

<p>
Justification is described in the Bible not only
as a remission of sins,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
Article 1.</note>
but likewise as the beginning
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
of a new life,<note place='foot'>Cfr. Eph. II, 5; Col. II, 13; 1
John III, 14.</note> a renewal of the spirit,<note place='foot'>Cfr. Eph. IV,
23 sq.</note> a new creation,<note place='foot'>Cfr. 2 Cor. V, 17; Gal. VI, 15;
Jas. I, 18; Ps. L, 12.</note> a regeneration,<note place='foot'>Cfr. John III,
5; Tit. III, 5.</note> a supernatural likeness of God,<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Rom. VIII, 29; 2 Cor. III, 18; 2 Pet. I, 4.</note> etc. All these similes point to
a permanent state of sanctity in the soul of the
just.
</p>

<p>
α) The Lutheran theory of imputation can be most
effectively refuted by an analysis of the Scriptural
term <q>regeneration</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>regeneratio</foreign>,
ἀναγέννησις, παλιγγενεσία).
<q>Unless a man be born again of water and
the Holy Ghost,</q> says our Divine Lord, <q>he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God.</q><note place='foot'>John III,
5.</note> This spiritual rebirth
wipes out sin and inwardly sanctifies the soul. The regenerate
sinner receives a new and godlike nature. That
this nature can be conceived in no other way than as a
state of sanctity and justice appears clearly from Tit. III,
5 sqq.: <q>Not by the works of justice which we have done,
but according to His mercy, He saved us, by the laver of
regeneration and renovation of the Holy Ghost, whom he
hath poured forth upon us abundantly, through Jesus
Christ our Saviour: that, being justified by His grace, we
may be heirs, according to the hope of life everlasting.</q><note place='foot'>Tit.
III, 5 sqq.: <q><foreign rend='italic'>Non ex
operibus iustitiae quae fecimus nos,
sed secundum suam misericordiam
salvos nos fecit (ἔσωσεν ἡμᾶς)
per lavacrum regenerationis et renovationis
(διὰ λυτροῦ παλιγγενεσίας
καὶ ἀνακαινώσεως) Spiritus
Sancti, quem effudit (ἐξέχεεν) in
nos abunde per Iesum Christum Salvatorem
nostrum, ut iustificati
(δικαιωθέντες) gratiâ ipsius haeredes
simus secundum spem vitae aeternae.</foreign></q></note>
Both text and context show that the Apostle is here speaking
of the justification of adult sinners in Baptism, which
he describes as a <q>laver of regeneration and renovation</q>
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
resulting in an <q>outpouring of the Holy Ghost.</q> These
phrases plainly denote a positive quality of the soul as well
as a permanent interior grace. Regeneration consists in
the remission of sin through Baptism, and also, more
particularly, in man being made like God, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> becoming
a child of God,<note place='foot'>Cfr. John I, 12 sq.; Rom. VIII,
16; Gal. III, 7; IV, 6 sq.; 1 John
III, 1.</note> while <q>renovation</q> means <q>putting
off the old man</q><note place='foot'>Cfr. Eph. IV, 22 sqq.</note>
and <q>putting on the new.</q><note place='foot'>Cfr. Col. III, 9 sq.</note>
The <q>outpouring of the Holy Ghost</q> effected by Baptism
is not, of course, an outpouring of the Hypostasis
of the Third Person of the Trinity, but of created
grace, which re-forms the sinner and makes him
just.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Acts II, 38; X, 45 sqq.;
Rom. V, 5.</note> This justifying grace must not be conceived as
an actual grace, much less as a series of actual graces, for
it is not given us merely as an aid in the performance
of some particular act, but as a new nature. Regeneration
and renovation denote a state of being, as we can
plainly see in the case of baptized infants. It is for this
reason that the Apostle speaks of it as a lasting state;&mdash;that
which theologians call the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>status gratiae
sanctificantis</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr. J. Pohle, article <q>Regeneration</q>
in the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic Encyclopedia</hi>,
Vol. XII, and A. Rademacher,
<hi rend='italic'>Die übernatürliche Lebensordnung
nach der paulinischen und johanneischen
Theologie</hi>, pp. 41 sqq., Freiburg
1903.</note>
</p>

<p>
Closely akin to the notion of <q>regeneration</q> is that
of <q>re-creation.</q> Justification renews the sinner inwardly
and makes of him, so to speak, a new creature, which
has sloughed off sin and become just and holy in the
sight of God. Cfr. 2 Cor. V, 17: <q>If then any be in
Christ a new creature, the old things are passed away,
behold all things are made new.</q><note place='foot'>2 Cor. V, 17:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si qua ergo
in Christo nova creatura (καινὴ
κτίσις), vetera transierunt; ecce
facta sunt omnia nova.</foreign></q> Cfr. Eph.
II, 10.</note> This is all the more
true since re-creation effects an <q>incorporation of man
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
with Christ,</q> and is closely connected with <q>regeneration
of God.</q> Cfr. James I, 18: <q>For of his own will
hath he begotten us by the word of truth, that we might
be some beginning of his creature.</q><note place='foot'>Jac. I, 18:
<q><foreign rend='italic'>Voluntarie enim
genuit (ἀπεκύησεν) nos verbo veritatis,
ut simus initium aliquod creaturae
eius.</foreign></q></note> A comparison
with Gal. VI, 15 and Gal. V, 6 fully establishes it as a
Biblical truth that in the process of justification the sinner,
through faith informed by charity, is changed into a
new creature. <q>For in Christ Jesus,</q> says St. Paul,
<q>neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision,
but a new creature.</q><note place='foot'>Gal. VI, 15:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In Christo enim
Iesu neque circumcisio aliquid valet
neque praeputium, sed nova creatura
(καινὴ κτίσις).</foreign></q></note> And again: <q>In Christ
Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision,
but faith that worketh by charity.</q><note place='foot'>Gal. V, 6:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nam in Christo
Iesu neque circumcisio aliquid valet
neque praeputium, sed fides quae
per caritatem operatur</foreign> (πίστις δι᾽
ἀγάπης ἐνεργουμένη).</q></note> In both
these texts the Jewish rite of circumcision is rejected
as useless and contrasted with justification, which by
means of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides
formata</foreign> gives birth to a <q>new creature.</q>
This is incompatible with the Protestant notion
that a man is justified by being declared righteous in the
sight of God, though he remains inwardly unchanged.<note place='foot'>On
the argument from Rom.
V, 15 sqq. cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God
the Author of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 247 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) The Lutherans vainly appeal to the fact that Holy Scripture employs the word
<q>justify</q><note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Iustificare,</foreign>
δικαιοῦν.</note> for
the purpose of declaring a man to be just in a
purely forensic sense, as in Is. V, 23: <q>Who justify
the wicked for gifts.</q> This proves nothing
against the Catholic doctrine, which is based entirely
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
on texts that exclude the judicial meaning of the term and plainly
refer to inward sanctification.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>,
Rom. V, 15 sqq. and
Gal. III, 8 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
The word <q>justification</q> also occurs in two other
meanings in the Bible. Ps. CXVIII, 8 and 26 it stands in the plural
for the <q>law</q>: <q>I will keep thy justifications;</q><note place='foot'>Ps.
CXVIII, 8: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Iustificationes
tuas custodiam.</foreign></q></note>
and <q>Teach me thy justifications.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. CXVIII, 26:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... doce
me iustificationes tuas.</foreign></q></note> Apoc.
XXII, 11 and in a few other passages it signifies
<q>growth</q> in interior holiness, which theologians call
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>iustificatio secunda</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Apoc.
XXII, 11: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Qui iustus
est, iustificetur adhuc, et sanctus
sanctificetur adhuc</foreign>.</q> On the different
meanings of the term justification
in Scripture see Bellarmine,
<hi rend='italic'>De Iustific.</hi>, I, 1; II, 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Lutherans are equally unfortunate in maintaining
that St. Paul countenances their theory when he
speaks of <q>putting on Christ.</q> Cfr. Gal. III, 27:
<q>For as many of you as have been baptized in Christ,
have put on Christ.</q><note place='foot'>Gal. III, 27:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quicunque
enim in Christo baptizati estis,
Christum induistis.</foreign></q></note> The Apostle in employing this
simile does not mean to say that justification consists in
putting on an outward cloak of grace to cover sins which
inwardly endure, but precisely the contrary, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: that
the sinner by being justified is inwardly cleansed from
sin and becomes a new creature and a child of God. This
interpretation is supported by various parallel texts<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Eph. IV, 22 sqq.; Col. III,
8 sqq.</note>
and by the staple of St. Paul's teaching.
</p>

<p>
Another passage which the Lutherans cite in their
favor is 1 Cor. I, 30: <q>... who [Christ Jesus] of God
is made unto us wisdom, and justice, and sanctification,
and redemption.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. I, 30:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Qui factus est
nobis sapientia a Deo et iustitia
(δικαιοσύνη) et sanctificatio (ἁγιασμός)
et redemptio</foreign>.</q></note> Christ is made unto us justice
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
and sanctification, in what sense? Manifestly in
the same sense in which He is made unto us wisdom
of God, that is to say, in so far as He imparts to us
wisdom, which thereupon becomes our own, but not in
the sense that the wisdom of Christ is outwardly imputed
to us. Note that St. Paul in this and many other
passages of his Epistles merely wishes to emphasize the
gratuity of the Redemption and of grace to the exclusion
of all natural merit on the part of man.<note place='foot'>Other objections are refuted by
Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De Iustif.</hi>, II, 9 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) As regards the teaching of the Fathers, the
<q>Reformers</q> themselves admitted that it was
against them.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Calvin, <hi rend='italic'>Instit.</hi>, III, 11, §
15: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ac nec Augustini quidem
sententia recipienda est, qui gratiam
ad sanctificationem refert, quâ in
vitae novitatem per Spiritum Sanctum
regeneramur.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
We read in the Epistle of Barnabas, which was
probably composed about A. D. 100:<note place='foot'>On the Epistle of Barnabas
see Bardenhewer-Shahan, <hi rend='italic'>Patrology</hi>,
p. 24. The passage quoted will be
found <hi rend='italic'>Ep. Barn.</hi>, VI, 11.</note> <q>Since
then He made us new by the remission of sins, he
made us another type, that we should have the
soul of children, as though He were creating us
afresh.</q>
</p>

<p>
The reason why St. Paul calls Baptism the
<q>laver of regeneration</q> rather than the laver of
forgiveness, is explained by St. John Chrysostom<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom.
ad Illumin.</hi>, I, n. 3.</note>
as follows: <q>Because it [Baptism] not
only remits our sins and wipes out our misdeeds,
but accomplishes all this in such a way as if we
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
were born anew;<note place='foot'>ὡς ἄν εἰ ἄνωθεν ἐγεννήθημεν.</note>
for it entirely re-creates and
re-forms us.</q><note place='foot'>καὶ γὰρ ἄνωθεν ἡμᾶς δημιουργεῖ
καὶ κατασκευάζει.</note>
</p>

<p>
St. Ambrose regards innocence as the positive
element of justification: <q>After this [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Baptism]
you received a white robe, to indicate that
you stripped off the vesture of sin and put on the
chaste garments of innocence.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Myst.</hi>,
c. 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Accepisti
post haec vestimenta candida [scil.
post baptismum], ut sint indicium
quod exueris involucrum peccati, indueris
innocentiae casta velamina.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
Harnack claims that St. Augustine first stemmed the
current dogmatic tradition and reshaped it by going back
to St. Paul. Bellarmine<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Iustific.</hi>,
II, 8.</note> refuted this audacious assertion
long before it was rehashed by the German rationalist.
The Council of Trent was so thoroughly imbued with
the teaching of Augustine that its decrees and canons
on justification read as though they were lifted bodily
from his writings. The great <q>Doctor of Grace</q>
flatly contradicts the Protestant theory of imputation
in such utterances as these: <q>He [St. Paul]
does not say, <q>the righteousness of man,</q> ... but <q>the
righteousness of God,</q>&mdash;meaning not that whereby He
is Himself righteous, but that with which He endows
man when He justifies the ungodly.... The righteousness
of God is by faith of Jesus Christ, that is, by the
faith wherewith one believes in Christ. For <emph>here</emph> is
not meant the faith with which Christ Himself believes,
just as <emph>there</emph> was not meant the righteousness whereby
God is Himself righteous. Both no doubt are ours;
but yet they are called [in one case] God's, and [in the
other] Christ's, because it is by their bounty that these
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
gifts are bestowed upon man.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Spiritu et Litera</hi>, c. 9, n.
15: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non dicit iustitia hominis,...
sed iustitia Dei, non quâ Deus
iustus est, sed quâ induit hominem,
quum iustificat impium.... Iustitia
autem Dei per fidem Iesu Christi,
hoc est, per fidem quâ creditur in
Christum. Sicut autem ista fides
Christi dicta est, non quâ credit
Christus, sic et illa iustitia Dei, non
quâ iustus est Deus. Utrumque
enim nostrum est; sed ideo Dei et
Christi dicuntur, quod eius nobis
largitate donatur.</foreign></q></note> Again: <q>When
righteousness is given to us, it is not called our own
righteousness, but God's, because it becomes ours only
so that we have it from God.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Christi</hi>, c. 13: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si
data est nobis iustitia, non dicitur
iustitia nostra, sed Dei, quia sic fit
nostra, ut sit nobis ex Deo.</foreign></q></note> Again: <q>The grace
of God is called the righteousness of God through our
Lord Jesus Christ, not that by which the Lord is just,
but that by which He justifies those whom from unrighteous
He makes righteous.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Serm.</hi>,
131: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dei gratia per
Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum
iustitia Dei dicitur, non quâ iustus
est Dominus, sed quâ iustificat eos,
quos ex impiis iustos facit.</foreign></q></note> Again: <q>The love
of God is said to be shed abroad in our hearts, not because
He loves us, but because He makes us lovers of
Himself; just as the righteousness of God is used in the
sense of our being made righteous by His gift.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Spir. et Lit.</hi>, c. 32, n. 56:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Caritas Dei dicta est diffundi in
cordibus nostris, non quâ ipse nos
diligit, sed quâ, nos facit dilectores
suos, sicut iustitia Dei, quâ nos iusti
eius munere efficimur.</foreign></q></note> According
to St. Augustine, therefore, justification culminates
in a true sanctification of the soul. <q>When he [St.
Paul] says: <q>We are transformed into the same image,</q>
he assuredly means to speak of the image of God; and
by calling it <q>the same,</q> he means that very image which
we see in the glass,... and that we pass from a form
that is obscure to a form that is bright,... and this
[human] nature, being the most excellent among things
created, is changed from a form that is defaced into
a form that is beautiful, when it is justified by its
Creator from ungodliness.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Trinit.</hi>,
XV, 8, 14: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quod
vero ait</foreign> (2 Cor. III, 18): <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'><q>In
eandem imaginem transformamur,</q>
utique imaginem Dei vult intellegi,
eandem dicens istam ipsam, scil.,
quam speculamur ... atque transimus
de forma obscura in formam
lucidam.... Quae natura [humana]
in rebus creatis excellentissima,
quum a suo Creatore ab impietate
iustificatur, a deformi forma
formosam transfertur in formam.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>

<p>
The Augustinian passages which we have quoted (and
they are not by any means all that could be quoted)
enumerate the distinguishing marks of sanctifying grace
in so far as it is the formal cause of justification.<note place='foot'>Other
Patristic texts can be
seen in Ripalda, <hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernal.</hi>,
disp. 132, sect. 7; Petavius, <hi rend='italic'>De
Trinit.</hi>, VIII, 4-7; Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia et Lib. Arbitrio</hi>, I, 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) The argument from Revelation can be reinforced
by certain philosophical considerations
which show the absurdity of the imputation
theory from the standpoint of common sense.
</p>

<p>
A man outwardly justified but inwardly a sinner
would be a moral monster, and Almighty God would
be guilty of an intrinsic contradiction were He to regard
and treat such a one as just. This contradiction is
not removed but rather intensified by the Lutheran appeal
to the extraneous justice of Christ.<note place='foot'>For a more detailed treatment
of this point we must refer the
reader to Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmat.
Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII, pp. 537
sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
The incongruity of the Lutheran doctrine of justification
becomes fully apparent from the consequences
which it involves, to wit: (1) all Christians without
distinction would possess exactly the same degree of
sanctity and justice; (2) justification once obtained by
fiduciary faith could not be lost except by the sin of
unbelief; and (3) children would not be justified by
Baptism because they are not sufficiently advanced in
the use of reason to enable them to <q>apprehend</q> the
external righteousness of Christ. The first of these inferences
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
runs counter to common sense and experience.
The second, which Luther clothed in the shameful exhortation,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pecca fortiter et crede fortius et nihil nocebunt
centum homicidia et mille stupra</foreign>,</q><note place='foot'>Quoted
by De Wette, II, 37.</note> is repugnant to the
teaching of Scripture and destructive of morality.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V.
infra</hi>, <ref target='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_3'>Section 3</ref>.</note> The
third consistently led to the rejection of infant baptism
by the Anabaptists, the Mennonites, and other Protestant
sects.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sanctifying Grace the Sole Formal
Cause of Justification</hi>.&mdash;In declaring that <q>inherent
grace</q> is the <q>sole formal cause of justification,</q>
the Council of Trent<note place='foot'>Sess. IV, cap. 7.</note> defined it as an
article of faith that sanctifying grace of itself is
able to produce all the formal effects of justification,
<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> forgiveness of sins, the sanctification of
the sinner, his adoption by God, etc.,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. infra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2_Article_2'>Sect. 2, Art. 2</ref>.</note>
and consequently
requires no supplementary or contributory
causes. In other words, justification is
wholly and fully accomplished by the infusion of
sanctifying grace.
</p>

<p>
a) It appears from the discussions preceding its sixth
session that the Tridentine Council not only meant
to condemn the heretical contention of Butzer that <q>inherent
grace</q> must be supplemented by the <q>imputed justice of
Christ</q> as the really essential factor of justification,<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De Iustific.</hi>,
II, 1.</note>
but also wished to reject the view of divers contemporary
Catholic theologians<note place='foot'>Seripando, Albertus Pighius,
Gropper, and others.</note> that <q>intrinsic righteousness</q>
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
is inadequate to effect justification without a special
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>favor Dei externus</foreign>.<note place='foot'>On
the discussion referred to
in the text see Pallavicini, <hi rend='italic'>Hist.
Conc. Trid.</hi>, VIII, 11, 12; Aug.
Theiner, <hi rend='italic'>Acta Genuina Concil.
Trid.</hi>, tom. I, pp. 222 sqq., Leipzig
1874.</note> In this the Fathers of the
Council were on Scriptural ground. The principal effects
of justification,&mdash;forgiveness of sins and internal sanctification,&mdash;are
both produced by sanctifying grace. Sacred
Scripture is perfectly clear on this point. It represents
sin as opposed to grace in the same way in which
darkness is opposed to light,<note place='foot'>Eph. V, 8; 2 Cor.
VI, 14.</note> life to death,<note place='foot'>Col. II, 13; 1 John III, 14.</note>
the new man to the old.<note place='foot'>Eph. IV, 22 sqq.; Col. III, 9.</note>
The one necessarily excludes the other.
Sanctifying grace and sin cannot co-exist in the same
subject.
</p>

<p>
Internal sanctification may be defined as a permanent,
vital union with God, by which the soul becomes righteous
and holy in His sight and obtains a claim to Heaven.
That this is also a function of sanctifying grace appears
from those Scriptural texts which treat of the positive
element of justification.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
No. 2.</note>
With this doctrine Tradition
is in perfect accord, and consequently the Fathers of
Trent were right in teaching as they did, in fact they
could not have taught otherwise.<note place='foot'>On the history of the Tridentine
decree regarding justification
cfr. J. Hefner, <hi rend='italic'>Die Entstehungsgeschichte
des Trienter Rechtfertigungsdekretes</hi>,
Paderborn 1909.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) While all Catholic theologians admit the incompatibility
of grace and sin in the same subject,
they differ as to the kind and degree of opposition
existing between the two. Some hold that
this opposition is purely moral, others that it is
physical, again others that it is metaphysical.
</p>

<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>

<p>
α) Nominalists<note place='foot'>Ockam, Gabriel Biel, <hi rend='italic'>et
al.</hi></note> and Scotists<note place='foot'>Henno, Mastrius,
<hi rend='italic'>et al.</hi></note> before the Tridentine
decision maintained that the distinction between
sanctifying grace and (original or mortal) sin is based on
a free decree of the Almighty, and therefore purely
moral. God, they held, by a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>favor
externus superadditus</foreign>,
externally supplies what sanctifying grace internally
lacks, just as a government's stamp raises the value
of a coin beyond the intrinsic worth of the bullion.
Followed to its legitimate conclusions, this shallow
theory means that sanctifying grace is of itself insufficient
to wipe out sin, and that, but for the superadded
divine favor, grace and sin might co-exist in the
soul. This is tantamount to saying that justification
requires a twofold formal cause, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: sanctifying grace
and a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>favor
Dei superadditus</foreign>,&mdash;which runs counter to
the teaching of Trent. Henno tries to escape this objection
by explaining that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>favor
Dei acceptans</foreign> appertains
not to the formal but merely to the efficient cause of
justification. But this contention is manifestly untenable.
Sanctifying grace is either able to wipe out sin, or
it is unable: if it is unable to produce this effect, the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>favor Dei acceptans</foreign>
must be part of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa formalis</foreign>
of justification, and then, in Henno's hypothesis, we
should have a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>duplex
causa formalis</foreign>, which contradicts
the Tridentine decree. If, on the other hand, sanctifying
grace is able to wipe out sin without any
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>favor superadditus</foreign>,
then the Scotistic theory has no <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>raison d'être</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
β) From what we have said it follows that there
must be at least a physical contrariety between grace and
sin. The difference between physical and metaphysical
opposition may be illustrated by the example of fire
and water. These two elements are incompatible by a
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
law of nature. But as there is no metaphysical contradiction
between them, Almighty God could conceivably
bring them together. It is this physical kind of opposition
that Suarez and a few of his followers assume to
exist between grace and sin. Absolutely speaking, they
say, there is no intrinsic contradiction in the assumption
that God could preserve the physical entity of sanctifying
grace in a soul guilty of mortal sin.<note place='foot'>Suarez,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, 1. VII, c.
20, n. 7: <q>... <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non obstante illâ
oppositione et repugnantiâ connaturali
potest Deus de suâ absolutâ potentiâ
eam vincere et conservare gratiam
in eo, qui peccavit, non remittendo
illi peccatum.</foreign></q></note> In so far as
this school admits the existence of an internal opposition,
which actually prevents original or mortal sin from ever
co-existing in the soul with justifying grace, its teaching
may be said to be acceptable to all Catholic theologians.
The Scotistic view, on account of its incompatibility
with the teaching of the Tridentine Council, is no longer
held.
</p>

<p>
It may be questioned, however, whether Suarez goes
far enough in this matter, and whether the opposition
between grace and sin could really be overcome by a
miracle. The simultaneous co-existence of grace and sin
seems to involve an absolute, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> metaphysical, contradiction.
</p>

<p>
γ) This is what the Thomists maintain with the majority
of Jesuit theologians.<note place='foot'>Vasquez, Sardagna, Antoine,
Mazzella, Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>et al.</hi></note> As some subtle objections
have been raised against this view, it cannot be accepted
as theologically certain; but it undoubtedly corresponds
better than its opposite to the spirit and letter of Scripture.
The Bible, as we have already pointed out,
likens the opposition existing between grace and sin to
that between life and death,<note place='foot'>Col. II, 13; 1
John III, 14.</note> justice and injustice,
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
Christ and Belial, God and an idol.<note place='foot'>2 Cor. VI, 14
sqq.</note> But these are contradictories,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ergo</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
1 John III, 9: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnis,
qui natus est ex Deo, peccatum non
facit, quoniam semen ipsius</foreign> (σπέρμα
αὐτοῦ) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in eo manet et non
potest peccare</foreign> (οὐ δύναται ἁμαρτάνειν),
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quoniam ex Deo
natus est.</foreign></q></note> The same conclusion can be
reached by arguing from the character of sanctifying
grace as a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>participatio
divinae naturae</foreign>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. infra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2_Article_1'>Sect. 2, Art. 1</ref>.</note>
If grace is a
participation in the divine nature, it must be opposed to
sin in the same way in which God Himself is opposed to
it. Now God as the All-Holy One is metaphysically opposed
to sin; consequently, the same kind of opposition
must exist between sanctifying grace and sin.
</p>

<p>
It is alleged against this teaching that between habitual
grace and habitual sin there is merely a disparate opposition,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> that of a physical to a moral form, the concepts
of which are not mutually exclusive. But sanctifying
grace is more than a physical ornament of the
soul; it is an ethical form which has for its essential
function to render the soul holy and righteous in the
sight of God.<note place='foot'>For the solution of other difficulties
consult Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Inst. Theol.</hi>,
Vol. VIII, pp. 152 sqq. On the
whole subject of this subdivision cfr.
Billuart, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, diss. 7, art. 2
sq. On certain incidental questions,
<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> whether justification takes
place <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in instanti</foreign>, whether the infusion
of sanctifying grace <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in ordine
naturae</foreign> precedes or follows the forgiveness
of sins, whether justification
is the greatest of God's works,
whether it is to be regarded as a
miracle, etc., see St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 113, art. 7-10;
cfr. also Scheeben, <hi rend='italic'>Die Mysterien
des Christentums</hi>, 3rd ed., pp. 543
sqq., Freiburg 1912.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Readings</hi>:&mdash;St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 113, and the commentators, especially Billuart,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, diss. 7, art. 1 sqq.; *Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De
Iustificatione</hi>, l. II (<hi rend='italic'>Opera Omnia</hi>, ed.
Fèvre, Vol. VI, pp. 208 sqq., Paris 1873).
</p>

<p>
Besides the current text-books cfr. *Jos. Wieser, <hi rend='italic'>S. Pauli
Apostoli Doctrina de Iustificatione</hi>, Trent 1874; H. Th. Simar,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Theologie des hl. Paulus</hi>, 2nd ed., §33 sqq. Freiburg 1883.
</p>

<p>
On the Protestant notion of justification cfr. Möhler, <hi rend='italic'>Symbolik</hi>,
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
§10 sqq., Mainz 1890 (Robertson's translation, pp. 82
sqq., 5th ed., London 1906); <hi rend='italic'>Realenzyklopädie für prot. Theologie</hi>,
Vol. XVI, 3rd ed., pp. 482 sqq., Leipzig 1905 (summarized in English
in the <hi rend='italic'>New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge</hi>,
Vol. VI, pp. 275 sqq., New York 1910); Card. Newman,
<hi rend='italic'>Lectures on the Doctrine of Justification</hi>, 8th impression, London
1900; J. Mausbach, <hi rend='italic'>Catholic Moral Teaching and its Antagonists</hi>,
New York 1914, pp. 150 sqq.&mdash;B. J. Otten, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>A Manual of the
History of Dogmas</hi>, Vol. II, St. Louis 1918, pp. 246 sqq., 464 sq.,
470 sqq.
</p>
</quote>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2'/>
<head>Section 2. Justifying Or Sanctifying Grace</head>

<p>
Sanctifying grace is defined by Deharbe as <q>an
unmerited, supernatural gift, imparted to the soul
by the Holy Ghost, by which we are made just,
children of God, and heirs of Heaven.</q> As it
makes sinners just, sanctifying grace is also called
justifying, though this appellation can not be
applied to the sanctification of our first parents
in Paradise or to that of the angels and the sinless
soul of Christ. Justification, as we have shown,
consists in the infusion of sanctifying grace, and
hence it is important that we obtain a correct idea
of the latter. We will therefore consider (1)
The Nature of Sanctifying Grace, (2) Its Effects
in the Soul, and (3) Its Supernatural Concomitants.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2_Article_1'/>
<head>Article 1. The Nature Of Sanctifying Grace</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sanctifying Grace a <q>Permanent Quality</q>
of the Soul.</hi>&mdash;Having no intuitive knowledge
of sanctifying grace, we are obliged, in order
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
to obtain an idea of its true nature, to study its
effects, as made known to us by Revelation.
Sacred Scripture and the teaching of the Church
do, however, enable us to form certain well-defined
conclusions, of which the most important is
that sanctifying grace must be conceived as a permanent
quality (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>qualitas permanens</foreign>) of the soul.
If it is a permanent quality, sanctifying grace
cannot be identical with actual grace or with <q>uncreated
grace,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the Person of the Holy Ghost.
</p>

<p>
a) In conformity with such Biblical expressions as
<q>the new life,</q> <q>renovation of the spirit,</q> <q>regeneration,</q>
<q>divine sonship,</q> etc., the Council of Trent defines
justifying grace as a supernatural something <q>infused</q>
into and <q>inherent</q> in the soul. Both ideas denote
a permanent state, not a mere transient act or the
result of such acts. <q>The charity of God is poured forth
by the Holy Spirit in the hearts of those that are justified,
and is inherent therein.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trid.</hi>,
Sess. VI, cap. 7:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Per spiritum sanctum caritas Dei
diffunditur in cordibus eorum, qui
iustificantur, atque ipsis inhaeret.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 800.)</note> <q>That justice which is called
ours, because we are justified from its being inherent in
us, that same is (the justice of God) because it is infused
into us by God, through the merit of Christ.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI,
cap. 16: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quae enim
iustitia nostra dicitur, quia per eam
nobis inhaerentem iustificamur, illa
eadem Dei est, quia a Deo nobis infunditur
per Christi meritum.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 809.)</note> <q>If any
one saith that men are justified ... to the exclusion of
the grace and the charity which is poured forth in their
hearts by the Holy Ghost and is inherent in them,...
let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI,
can. 11: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, homines iustificari ... exclusâ
gratiâ et caritate, quae in cordibus eorum per Spiritum sanctum
diffundatur atque in illis inhaereat, ...
anathema sit.</foreign></q>(Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 821.)</note> Hence Justification is defined by
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
the Fathers of Trent as <q>a translation ... to the state
of grace and adoption of the sons of God.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI,
cap. 4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>[Iustificatio
est] translatio ... in statum gratiae
et adoptionis filiorum Dei.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 796.)</note>
</p>

<p>
Before the Tridentine Council a number of theologians
held that sanctifying grace consists in some particular
actual grace or in a consecutive series of actual
graces. This view is incompatible with the definition just
quoted; in fact Suarez, Bellarmine, Ripalda, and others
regard it as positively heretical or at least intolerably
rash. During the preliminary debates at Trent some of
the Fathers asked for an express declaration of the Council
to the effect that justification is wrought by the instrumentality
of an infused habit; but their request was set
aside on the ground that the nature of justifying grace as
a stable habit is sufficiently indicated by the word
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inhaeret</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>Cfr.
Pallavicini, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Conc.
Trid.</hi>, VIII, 14, 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Postulantibus
quibusdam, ut expressius declararetur
fieri iustitiam per habitum
infusum, delecti Patres ad id responderunt,
id satis explicari per
vocem <q>inhaeret,</q> quae stabilitatem
significat et habitibus congruit, non
actibus.</foreign></q> It was on the same
ground that Pius V censured the
forty-second proposition of Baius,
<hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Iustitia quâ iustificatur per
fidem impius, consistit formaliter in
obedientia mandatorum, quae est
operum iustitia; non autem in gratia
aliqua animae infusa, quâ adoptatur
homo in filium Dei, et secundum
interiorem hominem renovatur ac
divinae naturae consors efficitur.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 1042.)</note>
</p>

<p>
That sanctifying grace is a permanent state of the soul
may also be inferred from the Catholic teaching that the
grace which Baptism imparts to children does not differ
essentially from that which it imparts to adults. True,
this teaching was not always regarded as certain;<note place='foot'>Cfr.
the <hi rend='italic'>Cap. Maiores</hi> of Pope
Innocent III (<hi rend='italic'>Decret.</hi>, l. 3, tit.
42, <hi rend='italic'>De Bapt.</hi>):
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Aliis asserentibus,
per virtutem baptismi parvulis quidem
culpam remitti, sed gratiam non
conferri; nonnullis dicentibus, dimitti
peccatum et virtutes infundi
quantum ad habitum, non quoad
usum.</foreign></q></note> but
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
at the Ecumenical Council of Vienne, A. D. 1311, Pope Clement V declared it
to be <q>the more probable opinion,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Summa Trinit. et Fide
Cath.</hi>: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quantum ad effectum
baptismi in parvulis reperiuntur
doctores quidam theologi opiniones
contrarias habuisse, quibusdam ex
ipsis dicentibus, per virtutem baptismi
parvulis quidem culpam remitti,
sed gratiam non conferri, aliis e
contra asserentibus, quod et culpa
eisdem in baptismo remittitur et
virtutes ac informans gratia infunduntur
quoad habitum, etsi non
pro illo tempore quoad usum. Nos
attendentes generalem efficaciam
mortis Christi, quae per baptisma
applicatur pariter omnibus baptizatis,
opinionem secundam tamquam
probabiliorem et dictis sanctorum et
modernorum theologorum magis consonam
et conformem sacro approbante
concilio duximus eligendam.</foreign></q></note>
and it was rendered absolutely certain by the Tridentine
decision that infant Baptism results not only in
the remission of sins, but likewise in an infusion of sanctifying
grace. This being so, there can be no essential
difference between the justification of children and that
of adults. Now it cannot be actual grace which renders
children righteous in the sight of God, for they are unable
to avail themselves of actual grace on account of the
undeveloped state of their intellect. The grace that Baptism
imparts to them is consequently a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia inhaerens
et informans</foreign>, that is, a permanent state of grace; and it
must be the same in adults.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trid.</hi>, Sess. V, can.
4; Sess. VII, can. 13. For a fuller
treatment consult Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>,
VI, 3; Vasquez, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S.
Th.</hi>, I, 2, disp. 203, cap. 6. The
false views of Hermes and Hirscher
are refuted by Kleutgen, <hi rend='italic'>Theologie
der Vorzeit</hi>, Vol. II, 2nd ed., pp.
254-343, Münster 1872.</note>
</p>

<p>
Peter Lombard<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Libri Quatuor Sent.</hi>, I,
dist 17, § 18.</note> identified sanctifying grace with the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia increata</foreign>,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the Person of the Holy Ghost.
This notion was combatted by St. Thomas<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 2a 2ae, qu. 23,
art. 2.</note> and implicitly
rejected by the Tridentine Council when it declared
that sanctifying grace inheres in the soul and may be
increased by good works.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trid.</hi>,
Sess. VI, can. 24.</note> To say that the Holy Ghost
is poured forth in the hearts of men, or that He may be
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
increased by good works, would evidently savor of Pantheism.
The Holy Ghost pours forth sanctifying grace
and is consequently not the formal but the efficient cause
of justification.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Schiffini,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>,
pp. 263 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
inhaerens permanens</foreign> is not a mere relation
or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>denominatio
extrinseca</foreign>, but a positive entity productive
of real effects,<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 110, art. 1;
<hi rend='italic'>Summa contra Gentiles</hi>, III, 150.</note>
and must consequently be conceived
either as a substance or as an accident. We have
shown that it is not identical with the uncreated substance
of the Holy Ghost. Neither can it be a created substance.
The idea of an intrinsically supernatural created substance
involves a contradiction.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
p. 193.</note> Moreover, sanctifying grace
in its nature and purpose is not an entity independently
co-existing with the soul but something physically inherent
in it. Now, a thing which has its existence by inhering in
some other thing is in philosophic parlance an <q>accident.</q>
St. Thomas expressly teaches that, <q>since it transcends
human nature, grace cannot be a substance nor a substantial form, but is
an accidental form of the soul itself.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 110,
art. 2, ad 2: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnis substantia
vel est ipsa natura rei, cuius est
substantia, vel est pars naturae,
secundum quem modum materia vel
forma substantia dicitur. Et quia
gratia est supra naturam humanam,
non potest esse quod sit substantia
aut forma substantialis, sed est
forma accidentalis ipsius animae. Id
enim quod substantialiter est in Deo,
accidentaliter fit in anima participante
divinam bonitatem.</foreign></q></note>
Agreeable to this conception is the further Thomistic
teaching that sanctifying grace is not directly created by
God, but drawn (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>educta</foreign>)
from the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentia obedientialis</foreign>
of the soul.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Billuart, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, diss.
6, art. 2.</note> Not even the Scotists, though they held
grace to be created out of nothing<note place='foot'>This theory was based on such
texts as Ps. L, 12: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cor mundum
crea in me.</foreign></q></note> claimed that it was
a new substance.
</p>

<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>

<p>
An accident that inheres in a substance permanently
and physically is called a quality (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>qualitas</foreign>,
ποιότης).
Consequently, sanctifying grace must be defined as a
supernatural quality of the soul. This is the express
teaching of the Roman Catechism: <q>Grace ... is a
divine quality inherent in the soul, and, as it were, a
certain splendor and light that effaces all the stains of
our souls and renders the souls themselves brighter and
more beautiful.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cat. Rom.</hi>,
P. II, c. 2 <hi rend='italic'>de Bapt.</hi>,
qu. 49: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Est autem gratia ...
divina qualitas in anima inhaerens
ac veluti splendor quidam et lux,
quae animarum nostrarum maculas
omnes delet ipsasque animas pulchriores
et splendidiores reddit.</foreign></q>
On the supernatural character of
sanctifying grace see Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God the Author of Nature and the
Supernatural</hi>, pp. 191 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sanctifying Grace an Infused Habit.</hi>&mdash;Sanctifying
grace may more specifically, though
with a lesser degree of certainty, be described
as a habit (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus</foreign>).
Being entitatively supernatural,
this habit must be infused or <q>drawn
out</q> by the Holy Ghost.
</p>

<p>
a) Aristotle<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Categ.</hi>,
6.</note> distinguishes four different sets of qualities:
(1) habit and disposition; (2) power and incapacity;
(3) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>passio</foreign>
(the power of causing sensations) and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>patibilis
qualitas</foreign> (result of the modification of sense); (4) figure
and circumscribing form (of extended bodies). As
sanctifying grace manifestly cannot come under one of
the three last-mentioned heads, it must be either a habit or
a disposition. Habit denotes a permanent and comparatively
stable quality, by which a substance, considered as to
its nature or operation, is well or ill adapted to its natural
end.<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... qualitas difficile mobilis,
secundum quam res bene vel male
se habet in ordine ad suam naturam
et ad operationem vel finem eius.</foreign></q>
Cfr. St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>, 1a
2ae, qu. 19, art. 2; S. Schiffini,
<hi rend='italic'>Principia Philosophica ad Mentem
Aquinatis</hi>, pp. 574 sqq., Turin 1886;
A. Lehmen, <hi rend='italic'>Lehrbuch der Philosophie
auf aristotelisch-thomistischer
Grundlage</hi>, Vol. I, 3rd ed., pp. 398
sqq., Freiburg 1904.</note> As a permanently inhering quality, sanctifying
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
grace must be a habit. Hence its other name, <q>habitual
grace.</q> The Scholastics draw a distinction between
entitative and operative habits. An operative habit
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus operativus</foreign>)
gives not only the power (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentia</foreign>)
to act, but also a certain facility, and may be either good,
bad, or indifferent. An entitative habit (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus
entitativus</foreign>)
is an inherent quality by which a substance is
rendered permanently good or bad, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> beauty, ugliness,
health, disease.
</p>

<p>
Philosophy knows only operative habits. But sanctifying
grace affects the very substance of the soul. Hence
the supplementary theological category of entitative
habits. <q>Grace,</q> says St. Thomas, <q>belongs to the first
species of quality, though it cannot properly be called a
habit, because it is not immediately ordained to action, but
to a kind of spiritual being, which it produces in the
soul.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Veritate</hi>, qu. 27, art. 2, ad
7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia est in prima specie
qualitatis, quamvis non proprie possit
dici habitus, quia non immediate
ordinatur ad actum, sed ad quoddam
esse spiritale, quod in anima facit.</foreign></q></note>
There is another reason why grace cannot be
called a habit in the philosophical sense of the term:&mdash;it
supplies no acquired facility to act. This consideration led
Suarez to abstain altogether from the use of the term
<q>habit</q> in connection with grace,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia</hi>, VI, 4, 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Abstinuimus
ab hac voce, quia per habitum
solet intelligi principium actus;
quamvis, si vox illa latius sumatur,
pro quacumque qualitate perficiente
animam, quae non sit actus secundus,
eadem certitudine, quâ ostendimus
dari gratiam permanentem, concluditur
esse qualitatem habitualem.</foreign></q></note> and induced Cardinal
Bellarmine to describe sanctifying grace as a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>qualitas per
modum habitus</foreign>,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia et Libero Arbitrio</hi>, I,
3.</note> by which phrase he wished to indicate
that it imparts a supernatural perfection of being rather
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
than a facility to act. To obviate these and similar subtleties
the Council of Trent defined sanctifying grace simply
as a permanent quality.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless scientific theology employs the term
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus</foreign>
because it has no other philosophical category
ready to hand. This defect in the Aristotelian system
is somewhat surprising in view of the fact that besides
the supernatural, there are distinctly natural qualities
which <q>belong to the first species,</q> though they
impart no facility to act but merely a disposition to certain
modes of being, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> beauty, health, etc.
</p>

<p>
There is also a positive reason which justifies the definition
of sanctifying grace as a habit. It is that grace
imparts to the soul, if not the facility, at least the power
to perform supernaturally meritorious acts, so that it is
really more than a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus
entitativus</foreign>, namely, a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus</foreign>
(at least remotely)
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>operativus</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Ripalda, <hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernaturali</hi>,
disp. 30. Under these circumstances
Suarez was justified in
saying, in regard to the degree of
certitude to be attributed to this
teaching: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis negaret gratiam
sanctificantem esse habitum, licet
esse temere dictum, non posset
tamen ut haereticum damnari.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
b) The Scholastic distinction between native and acquired
habits does not apply in the supernatural domain,
because the supernatural by its very definition can never
be either a part or an acquisition of mere nature.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 190 sqq.</note> It
follows from this that supernatural habits, both entitative
and operative, can be imparted to the human soul in no
other way than by infusion (or excitation) from above.
Hence the name <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus
infusus</foreign>. When the Holy Ghost
infuses sanctifying grace, the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus entitativus</foreign> imparts
to the soul a supernatural principle of being, while the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus operativus</foreign>
confers upon it a supernatural power,
which by faithful coöperation with (actual) grace may be
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
developed into a facility to perform salutary acts. Hence,
if we adopt the division of habits into entitative and operative,
sanctifying grace must be defined first as an entitative
habit (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus
entitativus</foreign>), because it forms the
groundwork of permanent righteousness, sanctity, divine
sonship, etc.; and, secondly, as an infused habit, because it
is not born in the soul and cannot be acquired by practice.
This view is in accord with Sacred Scripture, which describes
the grace of justification as a divine seed abiding
in man,<note place='foot'>Cfr. 1 John, III, 9: <q>σπέρμα
αὐτοῦ [scil. Θεοῦ] ἐν αὐτῷ μένει.</q></note>
a treasure carried in earthen vessels,<note place='foot'>Cfr. 2 Cor.
IV, 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... thesaurum
in vasis fictilibus.</foreign></q></note> a regeneration
by which the soul becomes the abode of God<note place='foot'>Cfr.
John XIV, 23: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mansionem
apud eum faciemus.</foreign></q></note>
and a temple of the Holy Ghost.<note place='foot'>Cfr. 1 Cor. III, 16.&mdash;On
the subtle question whether habitual
grace is to be regarded as
a real or merely as a modal accident
of the soul, see Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Inst. Theol.</hi>,
Vol. III, pp. 154 sqq., Paris 1896;
Chr. Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Prael. Dogmat.</hi>, Vol.
V, 3rd ed., pp. 181 sqq., Freiburg
1908. An extreme and altogether
unacceptable view is that of Billuart
(<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, diss. 6, art. 2), who
regards sanctifying grace as an absolute
accident, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> one which the
omnipotence of God could miraculously
sustain if the soul ceased to
exist. Cfr. Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, VII,
15; Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, p.
259; Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Inst. Theol.</hi>, Vol. III,
pp. 164 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2_Article_1_No_3'/>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Controversy Regarding the Alleged
Identity of Sanctifying Grace and
Charity.</hi>&mdash;As justifying grace and theological
love (charity) are both infused habits, the question
arises as to their objective identity. The
answer will depend on the solution of the problem,
just treated, whether sanctifying grace is primarily
an entitative or an operative habit. Of
theological love we know that it is essentially an
operative habit, being one, and indeed the chief
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
of the <q>three theological virtues.</q> What we
have said in the preceding paragraph will enable
the reader to perceive, at the outset, that there
is a real distinction between grace and charity,
and that consequently the two can not be identical.
</p>

<p>
a) Nevertheless there is an imposing school of
theologians who maintain the identity of grace
with charity. They are Scotus<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment. in Quatuor
Libros Sent.</hi>, II, dist. 27.</note> and his
followers,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>, Mastrius,
<hi rend='italic'>De Iustif.</hi>, disp.
7, qu. 6.</note>
Cardinal Bellarmine,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia et Libero Arbitrio</hi>, I, 6.</note> Molina, Lessius, Salmeron,
Vasquez, Sardagna, Tournely, and others.
Their principal argument is that Holy Scripture
ascribes active justification indiscriminately to
theological love and sanctifying grace, and that
some of the Fathers follow this example. Here
are a few of the Scriptural texts quoted in favor
of this opinion. Luke VII, 47: <q>Many sins are
forgiven her, because she hath loved much.</q><note place='foot'>Luke VII,
47: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Remittuntur
ei peccata multa, quoniam dilexit
(ἠγάπησεν) multum.</foreign></q></note>
1 Pet. IV, 8: <q>Charity covereth a multitude of
sins.</q><note place='foot'>1 Pet. IV, 8:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Caritas (ἀγάπη)
operit multitudinem peccatorum.</foreign></q></note>
1 John IV, 7: <q>Every one that loveth
is born of God.</q><note place='foot'>1 John IV, 7:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnis qui
diligit (πᾶσ ὁ ἀγαπῶν) ex Deo
natus est.</foreign></q></note> St. Augustine seems to identify
the two habits in such passages as the following:
<q>Inchoate love, therefore, is inchoate
righteousness; ... great love is great righteousness;
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
perfect love is perfect righteousness.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Natura et Gratia</hi>, c. 70, n.
84: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Caritas ergo inchoata, inchoata
iustitia est, ... caritas magna,
magna iustitia est, caritas perfecta,
perfecta iustitia est.</foreign></q></note>
According to the Tridentine Council, <q>the justification
of the impious</q> takes place when <q>the charity
of God is poured forth ... in the hearts of those that are
justified, and is inherent therein.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Trid.</hi>, Sess. VI, cap. 7:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... dum caritas Dei diffunditur
in cordibus eorum qui iustificantur
atque ipsis inhaeret.</foreign></q></note>
It is argued that, if charity and grace produce
the same effects, they must be identical as causes,
and there can be at most a virtual distinction between
them. This argument is strengthened by
the observation that sanctifying grace and theological
love constitute the supernatural life of the
soul and the loss of either entails spiritual death.
</p>

<p>
These arguments prove that grace and charity are inseparable,
but nothing more. All the Scriptural and Patristic
passages cited can be explained without recourse to
the hypothesis that they are identical. Charity is not superfluous
alongside of sanctifying grace, because the primary
object of grace is to impart supernatural being,
whereas charity confers a special faculty which enables
the intellect and the will to elicit supernatural salutary
acts.
</p>

<p>
b) The majority of Catholic theologians<note place='foot'>Preëminently Suarez, Tanner,
Ripalda.</note> hold
with St. Thomas<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 110,
art. 3 sq.; <hi rend='italic'>De Veritate</hi>, qu. 27, art. 2.</note>
and his school that grace and
charity, while inseparable, are really distinct,
sanctifying grace as a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus entitativus</foreign> imparting
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
to the soul a supernatural being, whereas
charity, being purely a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus
operativus</foreign>, confers
a supernatural power.
</p>

<p>
Let us put the matter somewhat differently. Grace
inheres in the substance of the soul, while charity has its
seat in one of its several faculties. Inhering in the very
substance of the soul, grace, by a physical or moral power,
produces the three theological virtues&mdash;faith, hope, and
love. <q>As the soul's powers, which are the wellsprings
of its acts, flow from its essence,</q> says the Angelic Doctor,
<q>so the theological virtues flow from grace into the
faculties of the soul and move them to act.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu.
110, art. 4, ad 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sicut ab essentia
animae effluunt eius potentiae,
quae sunt operum principia, ita etiam
ab ipsa gratia effluunt virtutes
[theologicae] in potentias animae,
per quas [virtutes] potentiae moventur
ad actus.</foreign></q></note> And
St. Augustine: <q>Grace precedes charity.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Dono Perseverantiae</hi>, c. 16,
n. 41: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia praevenit
caritatem.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
This is a more plausible view than the one we
have examined a little farther up, and it can claim
the authority of Scripture, which, though it occasionally
identifies the effects of grace and charity,
always clearly distinguishes the underlying habits.
Cfr. 2 Cor. XIII, 13: <q>The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ and the charity of God.</q><note place='foot'>2 Cor. XIII, 13:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia Domini
nostri Iesu Christi et caritas
Dei.</foreign></q></note> 1 Tim. I
14: <q>The grace of our Lord hath abounded exceedingly
with faith and love.</q><note place='foot'>1 Tim. I, 14:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Superabundavit
autem gratia Domini nostri cum
fide et dilectione.</foreign></q></note> Furthermore,
<q>regeneration</q> and <q>new-creation</q> in Biblical usage
affect not only the faculties of the soul, but its
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
substance. Finally, many councils consistently
distinguish between <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia</foreign>
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caritas</foreign>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>dona</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>virtutes</foreign>)&mdash;a
distinction which has almost the force
of a proof that grace and charity are not the same
thing.<note place='foot'>Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Conc. Viennense</hi>, A. D.
1311: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... gratiam informantem
et virtutes.</foreign></q> <hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trid.</hi>, Sess. VI,
cap. 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... per voluntariam susceptionem
gratiae et donorum.</foreign></q>
Sess. VI, can. 11: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... exclusâ
gratiâ et caritate.</foreign></q></note> These councils cannot have had in mind
a purely virtual distinction, because theological
love presupposes sanctifying grace in exactly the
same manner as a faculty presupposes a substance
or nature in which it exists. The Roman Catechism
expressly designates the theological virtues
as <q>concomitants of grace.</q><note place='foot'>For a fuller treatment of this
topic consult Billuart, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>,
diss. 4, art. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
The question nevertheless remains an open one, as
neither party can fully establish its claim, and the Church
has never rendered an official decision either one way or
the other.<note place='foot'>Ripalda justly observes
(<hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernaturali</hi>, disp. 132, n.
132, n. 53): <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Haec controversia
olim Celebris fuit. Nunc facile dirimitur,
quum iam constiterit nullius
partis argumenta plane convincere.</foreign></q>
On the theological aspects of Herbart's
philosophy, which denies the
existence of qualities and faculties
in the soul, see Heinrich-Gutberlet,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>, Vol.
VIII, p. 560, Mainz 1897.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2_Article_1_No_4'/>
4. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sanctifying Grace a Participation of
the Soul in the Divine Nature.</hi>&mdash;The highest
and at the same time the most profound conception
of sanctifying grace is that it is a real,
though of course only accidental and analogical,
participation of the soul in the nature of God.
That sanctifying grace makes us <q>partakers of
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
the divine nature</q> is of faith, but the manner in
which it effects this participation admits of different
explanations.
</p>

<p>
a) The fact itself can be proved from Sacred
Scripture. Cfr. 2 Pet. I, 4: <q>By whom [Christ]
He [the Father] hath given us great and precious
promises: that by these you may be made partakers
of the divine nature.</q><note place='foot'>2 Pet. I, 4:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... per quem
[i.e. Christum] maxima et pretiosa
nobis promissa donavit, ut per haec
efficiamini divinae consortes naturae</foreign>
(θείας κοινωνοὶ φύσεως).</q></note> To this text may be
added all those which affirm the regeneration of
the soul in God, because regeneration, being a new
birth, must needs impart to the regenerate the nature
of his spiritual progenitor. Cfr. John I,
13: <q>Who are born, not of blood, ... but of
God.</q><note place='foot'>John I, 13: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... qui non ex
sanguinibus, ... sed ex Deo nati
sunt.</foreign></q></note> John III, 5: <q>Unless a man be born
again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of heaven.</q><note place='foot'>John III, 5:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nisi quis renatus
fuerit ex aqua et Spiritu Sancto,
non potest introire in regnum Dei.</foreign></q></note> St. James
I, 18: <q>For of his own will hath he begotten us
by the word of truth.</q><note place='foot'>Jac. I, 18:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Voluntarie enim
genuit nos verbo veritatis.</foreign></q></note> 1 John III, 9: <q>Whosoever
is born of God, committeth no sin.</q><note place='foot'>1 John III, 9:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnis qui natus
est ex Deo, peccatum non facit.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
The Fathers of the Church again and again extol the
deification (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>deificatio</foreign>,
θείωσις) of man effected by sanctifying
grace and compare the union of the soul with God
to the commingling of water with wine, the penetration
of iron by fire, etc. St. Athanasius<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Or.
contr. Arian.</hi>, I, 39.</note> begins his
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
Christological teaching with the declaration: <q>He
was not, therefore, first man and then God, but first God
and then man, in order that He might rather deify us.</q><note place='foot'>ἵνα
μᾶλλον ἡμᾶς θεοποιήση.</note>
St. Augustine describes the process of deification as follows:
<q>He justifies who is just of Himself, not from
another; and He deifies who is God of Himself, not by
participation in another. But He who justifies also
deifies, because He makes [men] sons of God through
justification.... We have been made sons of God and
gods; but this is a grace of the adopting [God], not the
nature of the progenitor. The Son of God alone is
God; ... the others who are made gods are made gods
by His grace; they are not born of His substance, so as
to become that which He is, but in order that they may
come to Him by favor and become co-heirs with
Christ.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Psalmos</hi>,
49, n. 2: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ille
iustficat, qui per seipsum, non ex
alio iustus est; et ille deificat qui
per seipsum non alterius participatione
Deus est. Qui autem iustificat,
ipse deificat, quia iustificando
filios Dei facit.... Filii Dei facti
sumus et dii facti sumus; sed hoc
gratia est adoptantis, non natura
generantis. Unicum enim Dei Filius
Deus, ... ceteri qui dii fiunt, gratiâ
ipsius fiunt, non de substantia ipsius
nascuntur, ut hoc sint quod ille, sed
ut per beneficium perveniant ad eum
et sint cohaeredes Christi.</foreign></q> Many
other cognate Patristic texts in Ripalda,
<hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernaturali</hi>, disp.
132, sect. 7-9.</note> The idea underlying this passage has found
its way into the liturgy of the Mass,<note place='foot'>See,
<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, the Offertory and
Preface for the festival of the Ascension
of our Lord and the <hi rend='italic'>Secreta</hi>
for the fourth Sunday after Easter.</note> and Ripalda is
justified in declaring that it cannot be denied without
rashness.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Ripalda, <hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernaturali</hi>,
disp. 132, sect. 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Per
gratiam vero habitualem fieri hominem
participem divinae naturae
ideoque gratiam esse participationem
deitatis, adeo frequens est et constans
theologorum assertum, ut
absque temeritate negari non possit.</foreign></q>
On the teaching of St. Thomas and
the Thomists see Billuart, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>,
diss. 4, art. 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) In trying to explain in what manner grace
enables us to partake of the divine nature, it
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
is well to keep in view the absolutely supernatural
character of sanctifying grace and the impossibility
of any deification of the creature in the strict
sense of the term. The truth lies between these
two extremes.
</p>

<p>
A few medieval mystics<note place='foot'>Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Prop. Ekkardi a. 1329
damn. a Ioanne XXII</hi>, prop. 10,
quoted in Denzinger-Bannwart's <hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>,
n. 510.</note> and modern Quietists<note place='foot'>Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Prop.
Mich. de Molinos
a. 1687 damn, ab Innocentio XI</hi>,
prop. 5, in Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
1225.</note>
were guilty of exaggeration when they taught that
grace transforms the human soul into the substance of
the Godhead, thus completely merging the creature in its
Creator. This contention<note place='foot'>The Fourth Council of the
Lateran (A. D. 1215) calls it <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>doctrina
non tam haeretica quam insana</foreign>.</q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
433.)</note> leads to Pantheism. How
can the soul be merged in the Creator, since it continues
to be subject to concupiscence? <q>We have
therefore,</q> says St. Augustine, <q>even now begun to be
like Him, as we have the first-fruits of the Spirit; but
yet even now we are unlike Him, by reason of the old
nature which leaves its remains in us. In as far, then,
as we are like Him, in so far are we, by the regenerating
Spirit, sons of God; but in as far as we are unlike Him,
in so far are we the children of the flesh and of this
world.</q><note place='foot'>St. Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De Peccatorum
Meritis et Remissione</hi>, II, 8, 10:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nunc ergo et similes esse iam
coepimus primitias spiritus habentes,
et adhuc dissimiles sumus per reliquias
vetustatis. Proinde inquantum
similes, in tantum regenerante
Spiritu filii Dei; inquantum autem
dissimiles, in tantum filii carnis et
saeculi.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
On the other hand it would be underestimating the
power of grace to say that it effects a merely external
and moral participation of the soul in the divine nature,
similar to that by which those who embraced the faith of
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
Abraham were called <q>children of Abraham,</q> and those
who commit heinous crimes are called <q>sons of the
devil.</q> According to the Fathers<note place='foot'>Quoted by Ripalda,
<hi rend='italic'>De Ente
Supernaturali</hi>, disp. 132, sect. 9.</note> and theologians, to
<q>partake of the divine nature</q> means to become internally
and physically like God and to receive from Him
truly divine gifts, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> such as are proper to God alone and
absolutely transcend the order of nature.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>,
1a 2ae qu. 112, art. 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Donum
autem gratiae excedit omnem facultatem
naturae creatae, quum nihil
aliud sit quam quaedam participatio
divinae naturae, quae excedit omnem
aliam naturam.</foreign></q></note> Being self-existing,
absolutely independent, and infinite, God cannot,
of course, be regarded as the formal cause of created
sanctity; yet the strictly supernatural gifts which He
confers on His creatures, especially the beatific vision
and sanctifying grace, can be conceived only <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per modum
causae formalis</foreign> (not
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>informantis</foreign>), because through them
God gives Himself to the creature in such an intimate
way that the creature is raised up to and transfigured by
Him.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God: His
Knowability, Essence, and Attributes</hi>,
pp. 165 sqq.; <hi rend='italic'>Christology</hi>, pp.
85 sqq.</note> Consequently, the so-called
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>deificatio</foreign> of the soul
by grace is not a real deification, but an assimilation of
the creature to God.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. John of Damascus, <hi rend='italic'>De
Fide Orthodoxa</hi>, II, 12 <q>[ἄνθρωπον]
θεούμενον δὲ μετοχῇ τῆς θείας
ἐλλάμψεως καὶ οὐκ εἰς τὴν θείαν
μεθιστάμενον οὐσίαν.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
c) Which one of God's numerous attributes
forms the basis of the supernatural communication
made to the soul in the bestowal of grace, is
a question on which theologians differ widely.
The so-called incommunicable attributes, (self-existence,
immensity, eternity, etc.), of course,
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
cannot be imparted to the creature except by way
of a hypostatic union.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God: His
Knowability, Essence, and Attributes</hi>,
pp. 165 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
Gonet<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Clyp. Thomist.</hi>, tom. VI, disp.
2, § 10.</note> misses the point at issue, therefore, when He
declares the essential characteristic of deification to be the
communication to the creature of the divine attributes
of self-existence and infinity. Self-existence is absolutely
incommunicable.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, VII, 1,
27: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Eo ipso quod divinum esse
participatur, non participatur ut
imparticipatum est.</foreign></q></note> Somewhat more plausible, though
hardly acceptable, is Ripalda's opinion that deification
formally consists in the participation of the creature in the
holiness of the Creator, particularly in the supernatural
vital communion of the soul with God in faith, hope, and
charity, thus making sanctifying grace the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>radix totius
honestatis moralis</foreign>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Ente
Supernaturali</hi>, disp.
20, sect. 14.</note> While it is perfectly true that the
supernatural life of the soul is a life in and through God,
and that the very concept of sanctifying grace involves a
peculiar and special relation of the soul to God, the Biblical
term κοινωνία θείας φύσεως points to a still deeper principle
of the sanctifying <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vita deiformis</foreign>. This
principle, as some of the Fathers intimate, and St. Thomas expressly
teaches,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>S. Theol.</hi>, 1a, qu. 93, art.
4.</note> is the absolute intellectuality of God.
Hence the object of sanctifying grace is to impart to the
soul in a supernatural manner such a degree of intellectuality
as is necessary to perceive the absolute Spirit&mdash;here
on earth in the obscurity of faith, and in the life beyond by
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lumen gloriae</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, VII,
1, 30: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vera ergo excellentia gratiae
habitualis, propter quam dicitur
esse singularis participatio divinae
naturae, est ... quia, quum natura
divina sit quaedam intellectualis
natura altioris ordinis quam sit vel
esse possit ulla substantia intellectualis
creata, ille gradus intellectualitatis,
qui est in divina natura,
divino quodam et supernaturali
modo participatur per habitualem
gratiam, quo quidem modo
a nulla substantia creata per
se ipsam vel per potentiam sibi connaturalem
participari potest....
Divina enim essentia in ratione
obiecti intelligibilis in se et per visionem
intuitivam ad ipsam Dei essentiam
immediate terminatam adeo
est elevata et excellens ratione
purissimae actualitatis et immaterialitatis
suae, ut a nulla substantia
intellectuali possit connaturaliter
videri, nisi a seipsa. Per gratiam
vero et dona supernaturalia elevatur
natura creata intellectualis ad participationem
illius gradus intellectualitatis
divinae, in quo possit obiectum
illud intelligibile divinae essentiae
in se intueri.</foreign></q></note> This view is to a
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
certain extent confirmed by Sacred Scripture, which describes
the regeneration of the sinner as a birth of spirit
from spirit.<note place='foot'>John III, 6; cfr. 2 Cor. III, 18;
Eph. V, 18.</note> It is also held by some of the Fathers,
who attribute to sanctifying grace both a deifying and
a spiritualizing power. Thus St. Basil<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Spiritu Sancto</hi>, c. 9, n. 23.</note> says: <q>The
spirit-bearing souls, illuminated by the Holy Ghost,
themselves become spiritual<note place='foot'>πνευματικαί.</note>
and radiate grace to others.
Hence ... to become like unto God,<note place='foot'>ἡ πρὸς Θεὸν ὁμοίωσις.</note>
is the highest of all
goals: to become God.</q><note place='foot'>θεὸν γενέσθαι.</note>
Finally, since the Holy Ghost,
as the highest exponent of the spirituality of the divine
nature, by His personal indwelling crowns and consummates
both the regeneration of the soul and its assimilation
to God, there is a strong theological probability in
favor of Suarez's view. Of course the process does not
attain its climax until the creature is finally admitted to
the beatific vision in Heaven. Cfr. 1 John III, 2: <q>We
are now the sons of God, and it hath not yet appeared
what we shall be. We know that, when He shall appear,
we shall be like to Him, because we shall see Him as
He is.</q><note place='foot'>1 John III, 2: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nunc filii
Dei sumus et nondum apparuit, quid
erimus; scimus quoniam, quum
apparuerit, similes ei erimus (ὅμοιοι
αὐτῷ ἐσόμεθα), quoniam videbimus
eum sicuti est.</foreign></q> On this passage see
Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God: His Knowability,
Essence, and Attributes</hi>, pp. 96 sq.
On the whole subject treated in this
subdivision consult Heinrich-Gutberlet,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>, Vol.
VIII, pp. 588 sqq.; A. Rademacher,
<hi rend='italic'>Die übernatürliche Lebensordnung
nach der paulinischen und johanneischen
Theologie</hi>, pp. 88 sqq.,
Freiburg 1903; A. Prumbs, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Stellung des Trienter Konzils zu
der Frage nach dem Wesen der
heiligmachenden Gnade</hi>, Paderborn
1910.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2_Article_2'/>
<head>Article 2. The Effects Of Sanctifying Grace</head>

<p>
We shall better understand the nature of sanctifying
grace by studying what are known as its <q>formal effects.</q>
As the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa
efficiens</foreign> of a thing is commonly farther removed
from our mental grasp than its effects, we are
ordinarily more familiar with the latter than with the
former. For this reason the glories of divine grace can be
best explained to children and to the faithful in general by
describing the effects it produces in the soul.<note place='foot'>For
a fuller treatment we must
refer the reader to Scheeben, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Herrlichkeiten der göttlichen Gnade</hi>,
8th ed., Freiburg 1908; English
translation by a Benedictine monk
of St. Meinrad's Abbey, <hi rend='italic'>The
Glories of Divine Grace</hi>, 3rd ed.,
New York <hi rend='italic'>s. a.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sanctity.</hi>&mdash;The first among the formal effects
of sanctifying grace (an effect connoted by its
very name) is sanctity. Eph. IV, 24:
<q>Put on the new man, who according to God is
created in justice and holiness of truth.</q><note place='foot'>Eph.
IV, 24: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Induite novum
hominem, qui secundum Deum
creatus est in iustitia et sanctitate
veritatis.</foreign></q> On this text see Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God the Author of Nature
and the Supernatural</hi>, p. 197.</note> The
Tridentine Council explicitly mentions sanctity as
an effect of sanctifying grace: <q>Justification ...
is not remission of sins merely, but also the
sanctification and renewal of the inward man
through the voluntary reception of the grace and
of the gifts whereby man from unjust becomes
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
just.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 7:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... non est
sola peccatorum remissio, sed et
sanctificatio et renovatio interioris
hominis per voluntariam susceptionem
gratiae et donorum, unde homo
ex iniusto fit iustus.</foreign></q></note> It follows that the two elements of active
justification, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: remission of sin and sanctification,
are also constitutive elements of habitual
or sanctifying grace. For it is precisely by the
infusion of sanctifying grace that sin is wiped out
and sanctity established in its place.<note place='foot'>On
the concept of sanctity see Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>God: His Knowability, Essence,
and Attributes</hi>, pp. 251 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
a) By sanctifying grace the justified man becomes a
living member (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>membrum
vivum</foreign>) of the mystical body
of Christ. His sins, it is true, did not forfeit membership
in the Church, so long as he preserved the faith, but
by sinning he became a dead member who can regain life
only by returning to the state of grace. Grace is the
life of the soul, sin its death. Hence the evil of mortal
sin can be most effectively illustrated by contrast with the
glory of divine grace, and <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>. Cfr. Gal. II, 20:
<q>And I live, now not I, but Christ liveth in me.</q><note place='foot'>Gal.
II, 20: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vivo autem iam
non ego, vivit vero in me Christus.</foreign></q>
On the life of the soul in and
through grace cfr. Heinrich-Gutberlet,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>, Vol.
VIII, § 466.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) He who hates mortal sin and faithfully obeys the
will of God, enjoys peace of heart,<note place='foot'>Cfr.
2 Cor. VII, 4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Superabundo
gaudio in omni tribulatione
nostra.</foreign></q></note> whereas the sinner is
incessantly harassed by qualms of conscience. The faithful
Christian rejoices in serving His Master and combats
the flesh, the world, and the devil with a fortitude that not
infrequently rises to heroic proportions, as the example
of many holy men and women proves.
</p>

<p>
c) Sanctifying grace entails a particular providence, inasmuch
as, by means of it, God grants man His special
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
assistance towards preserving the state of grace, without,
of course, interfering with free-will. Cfr. Is. XLIX, 16:
<q>Behold, I have graven thee in my hands.</q><note place='foot'>Is. XLIX, 16:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ecce in manibus
meis descripsi te.</foreign></q></note> Rom. VIII,
28: <q>... to them that love God, all things work together
unto good.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. VIII, 28:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Diligentibus
Deum omnia cooperantur in bonum.</foreign></q></note> Mediately, God also proves his
special love for the just man by shielding him from bodily
and spiritual danger.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Supernatural Beauty.</hi>&mdash;Though we can
quote no formal ecclesiastical definition to prove
that sanctifying grace beautifies the soul, the fact
is sufficiently certain from Revelation. If, as
is quite generally held by Catholic exegetes, the
Spouse of the Canticle typifies the human soul
endowed with sanctifying grace, all the passages
describing the beauty of that Spouse must be applicable
to the souls of those whom Christ embraces
with His tender love. The Fathers of
the Church frequently extol the supernatural
beauty of the soul in the state of grace. Ambrose
calls it <q>a splendid painting made by God Himself;</q>
Chrysostom compares it to <q>a statue of
gold;</q> Cyril, to <q>a divine seal;</q> Basil, to <q>a shining
light,</q> and so forth. St. Thomas says: <q>Divine grace
beautifies [the soul] like light,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Ps.</hi>,
25: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia divina
pulchrificat sicut lux.</foreign></q></note>
and the Roman Catechism declares: <q>Grace ...
is a certain splendor and light that effaces
all the stains of our souls and renders the
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
souls themselves brighter and more
beautiful.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cat. Rom.</hi>, P. II, Ch. II, qu.
49: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Est autem gratia ... splendor
quidam et lux, quae animarum
maculas delet ipsasque animas pulchriores
et splendidiores reddit.</foreign></q>
On the aptness of this simile see
Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, p. 268.
Freiburg 1901.</note>
</p>

<p>
In defining beauty as <q>the representation of an
idea in a sensual form,</q> modern aesthetics has eliminated
the spiritual element and in consequence is unable
to appreciate the spiritual beauty of God and of the
soul. Being composed of body and soul, man is naturally
most impressed by beauty when it appears in a material
guise. But this does not prove that there is no
spiritual beauty, or that true beauty abides solely in matter.
Some present-day writers strongly emphasize the
need of realism as against an idealism which, they
claim, is not truly human because it exalts the spiritual
at the expense of the material. In its last conclusions this
perverted realism harks back to the sophistry of Protagoras
who held that <q>man is the measure of all things.</q><note place='foot'>Ἄνθρωπος
μέτρον πάντων.</note>
Idealism, on the other hand, is based on the true
Platonic doctrine that God is the measure of all things.<note place='foot'>Θεὸς
μέτρον πάντων.</note>
St. Augustine defines beauty as <q>unity in variety,</q> which
is a correct definition, because it is adaptable to both
the spiritual and the material order.<note place='foot'>On the notion of beauty see
Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God: His Knowability,
Essence, and Attributes</hi>, pp. 265 sqq.</note> Applying this definition
we find that the soul is not only naturally beautiful
by the substantial unity and simplicity which shines forth
in the variety of its faculties and powers, but also supernaturally
by virtue of sanctifying grace, which transfuses
nature into a new unity with the supernatural,&mdash;at the
same time producing a variety of theological and moral
virtues and the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost, and thus
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
creating a true work of art. Moreover, by enabling
man to participate in the Divine Nature,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V.
supra</hi>, <ref target='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2_Article_1_No_4'>Art. 1,
No. 4</ref>.</note> grace produces
in the soul a physical reflection of the uncreated
beauty of God, a likeness of the creature with its Creator,
which far transcends the natural likeness imprinted by
creation. True, only God and the Elect in Heaven perceive
and enjoy this celestial beauty; but we terrestrial
pilgrims can, as it were, sense it from afar and indulge
the hope that we may one day be privileged to contemplate
and enjoy the divine beauty that envelops the souls endowed
with grace.
</p>

<p>
The beauty produced by sanctifying grace must be conceived
not merely as a reflection of the absolute nature of
God, who is the pattern-exemplar of all beauty, but more
specifically as an image of the Trinity impressed upon the
soul. St. Paul teaches that the soul is transformed into
an image of the Divine Logos, to whom, as the holy
Fathers tell us, beauty is appropriated in an especial manner.<note place='foot'>On
the divine appropriations
see Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>The Divine Trinity</hi>,
pp. 244 sqq.</note>
Cfr. Rom. VIII, 29: <q>Whom he foreknew, he
also predestinated to be made conformable to the image
of his Son.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. VIII, 29:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... praedestinavit
conformes fieri imaginis
Filii sui.</foreign></q></note> Gal. IV, 19: <q>My little children, of
whom I am in labor again, until Christ be formed in
you.</q><note place='foot'>Gal. IV, 19: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Filioli mei,
quos iterum parturio, donec formetur
Christus in vobis.</foreign></q></note> In virtue of the adoptive sonship effected by
grace,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. infra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2_Article_2_No_4'>No. 4</ref>.</note>
the soul becomes a true <q>temple of the Holy
Ghost.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. infra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2_Article_3_No_4'>Art. 3, No. 4</ref>. On
the whole subject cfr. Heinrich-Gutberlet,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>, Vol.
VIII, § 465; H. Krug, <hi rend='italic'>De Pulchritudine
Divina</hi>, pp. 53 sqq., 144 sqq.,
241 sqq., Freiburg 1902.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Friendship of God.</hi>&mdash;Closely connected
with the beauty which sanctifying grace
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
confers, is the supernatural friendship it establishes
between God and the soul. True beauty
elicits love and benevolence. By nature man is
merely a servant of God; in fact, since the fall, he
is His enemy. Sanctifying grace transforms this
hostile relation into genuine friendship. By
grace, says the Council of Trent, <q>man of unjust
becomes just, and of an enemy a friend.</q><note place='foot'>Sess.
VI, cap. 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... unde
homo ex iniusto fit iustus et ex
inimico amicus.</foreign></q></note> And
again: <q>Having been thus justified and made
the friends and domestics of God.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI,
cap. 10: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sic ergo
iustificati et amici Dei ac domestici
facti....</foreign></q></note> God loves
the just man as His intimate friend and enables
and impels him, by means of habitual grace and
habitual charity, to reciprocate that love with
all his heart. Here we have the two constituent
elements of friendship. The Bible frequently
speaks of friendship existing between God and the
just. Cfr. Wisd. VII, 14: <q>They [the just] become
the friends of God.</q><note place='foot'>Wisd. VII,
14: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Participes
facti sunt amicitiae Dei.</foreign></q></note> John XV, 14 sq.:
<q>I will not now call you servants, ... but I have
called you friends.</q><note place='foot'>John XV,
14 sq.: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Iam non
dicam vos servos, ... vos autem
dixi amicos.</foreign></q></note> This friendship is sometimes
compared to a mystic marriage. Cfr.
Matth. IX, 15: <q>And Jesus said to them: Can
the children of the bridegroom mourn, as long as
the bridegroom is with them?</q><note place='foot'>Matth. IX,
15: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Numquid
possunt filii sponsi lugere, quamdiu
cum illis est sponsus?</foreign></q></note> Apoc. XIX, 7:
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
<q>The marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife
hath prepared herself.</q><note place='foot'>Apoc. XIX, 7:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Venerunt
nuptiae Agni et uxor eius praeparavit
se.</foreign></q> Cfr. John III, 29; Eph.
V, 23 sqq.; 2 Cor. XI, 2; Cant. IV,
1 sqq.; Ps. XLIV, 22 sqq. On the
teaching of the Fathers see Cornelius
a Lapide, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in 2 Cor.</hi>,
XI, 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
a) Friendship (φιλία), according to Aristotle,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Eth.
ad Nichom.</hi>, VIII sq.</note> is <q>the
conscious love of benevolence of two persons for each
other.</q> Hence, to constitute friendship, there must be
(1) two or more distinct persons; (2) pure love of benevolence
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>(amor benevolentiae</foreign>,
not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>concupiscentiae</foreign>), because
only unselfish love can truly unite hearts; (3)
mutual consciousness of affection, because without a
consciousness of the existing relation on both sides
there would be merely one-sided benevolence, not friendship.
It follows that true friendship is based on virtue
and that a relation not based on virtue can be called
friendship in a qualified or metaphorical sense only
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>amicitia utilis,
delectabilis</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
From what we have said it is easy to deduce the essential
characteristics of true friendship. They are: (1)
benevolence; (2) love consciously entertained by both
parties; (3) a mutual exchange of goods or community of
life; (4) equality of rank or station. The first condition
is based on the fact that a true friend will not seek his
own interest, but that of his friend. It is to be noted,
however, that one's joy at the presence or prosperity of a
friend must not be inspired by selfishness or sensual desire,
for in that case there would be no true friendship.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in
Quatuor Libros Sent.</hi>, III, dist. 27,
qu. 2, art. 1, ad 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Amicitia
vera desiderat videre amicum et
colloquiis mutuis gaudere facit, ad
quem principaliter est amicitia; non
autem ita, quod delectatio ex amici
visione et perfruitione, finis amicitiae
ponatur.</foreign></q></note>
The second condition is based on the necessity of friendship
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
being mutual love, for friendship is not a one-sided
affection, nor does it spend itself in mutual admiration.
The third condition is necessary for the reason that love,
if it is to be more than <q>Platonic,</q> must result in acts
of benevolence and good will.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa Theologica</hi>,
1a 2ae, qu. 28, art. 1:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quum aliquis amat aliquem amore
amicitiae, vult ei bonum, sicut et
sibi vult bonum, unde apprehendit
eum ut alterum se, inquantum scil.
ei vult bonum, sicut et sibi vult
bonum. Et inde est, quod amicus
dicitur esse alter ipse. Et Augustinus
dicit in l. 4 Confess.: Bene
quidam dixit de amico suo, <q>dimidium
animae meae</q>.</foreign></q></note> Of the fourth condition
St. Jerome says: <q>Friendship finds men equal or
makes them equal.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Amicitia
pares aut invenit aut
facit.</foreign></q> <hi rend='italic'>In Mich.</hi>, 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) All these conditions are found in the friendship
with which Almighty God deigns to honor those who are
in the state of sanctifying grace.
</p>

<p>
(1) That God loves the just man with a love of
pure benevolence and eagerly seeks his companionship, is
proved by the mysteries of the Incarnation and the Holy
Eucharist. Cfr. Prov. VIII, 31: <q>And my delight [is]
to be with the children of men.</q><note place='foot'>Prov. VIII, 31:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deliciae
meae esse cum filiis hominum.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
(2) The just man is enabled to return God's love by
the habit of theological charity, which is inseparably
bound up with and spontaneously flows from sanctifying
grace.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2_Article_1_No_3'>Art. 1, No. 3</ref>.</note>
God's consciousness of this mutual love is, of
course, based on certain knowledge, whereas man can
have merely a probable conjecture. This, however, suffices
to establish a true friendship, as the example of human
friends shows.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in
Quatuor Libros Sent.</hi>, III, dist. 37,
qu. 2, art. 1, ad 10: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Amicitia
dicitur esse non latens, non quod
per certitudinem amor amid cognoscatur,
sed quia per signa probabilia
amor mutuus habentium coligitur.
Et talis manifestatio potest
esse de caritate, inquantum per
aliqua signa potest aliquis probabiliter
aestimare se habere caritatem.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>

<p>
(3) There is also community of life and property between
God and man when the latter is in the state of sanctifying
grace; for not only is he indebted to God for his
very nature and all natural favors which he enjoys, but
likewise and especially for the supernatural blessings bestowed
upon him.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Ecclus. XXXIV, 14 sqq.</note>
On his own part, it is true, he cannot
give his Benefactor anything in return which that
Benefactor does not already possess; but the just man is
ever eager to further God's external glorification, agreeable
to the first petition of the Our Father: <q>Hallowed
by Thy name.</q><note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, III,
dist. 29, qu. 1, art. 3, ad 4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si
esset possibile, quod ex nostris operibus
aliquid Deo accresceret, habens
caritatem multo plura faceret propter
beatitudinem ei conservandam,
quam propter eam sibi adipiscendam.</foreign></q></note>
God has furthermore given him a kind
of substitute for operative charity in the love of his neighbor,
which has precisely the same formal object as the
love of God. Cfr. 1 John III, 17: <q>He that hath the
substance of this world, and shall see his brother in need,
and shall shut up his bowels from him: how doth the
charity of God abide in him?</q><note place='foot'>1 John III, 17:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Qui habuerit
substantiam huius mundi et
viderit fratrem suum necessitatem
habere et clauserit viscera sua ab
eo, quomodo caritas Dei</foreign> (ἡ ἀγάπη
τοῦ Θεοῦ) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>manet in ea?</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
(4) There can be no real equality between God and the
human soul, but God in His infinite goodness, elevating
the soul to a higher plane and allowing it to participate
in His own nature,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2_Article_1_No_4'>Art. 1, No. 4</ref>.</note>
makes possible an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>amicitia excellentiae
s. eminentiae</foreign>, which is sufficient to constitute a
true relation of friendship. Without this elevation of
the soul by grace there could be no friendship between
God and man.<note place='foot'>The singular opinion of Ripalda
(<hi rend='italic'>De Caritate</hi>, disp. 33), that
such a relation would be possible
even in the state of pure nature,
is rejected by Suarez as incorrect
(<hi rend='italic'>De Caritate</hi>, disp. 3, sect. 5, n. 4).
On the whole question cfr. Schiffini,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 305
sqq.</note>
</p>

<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2_Article_2_No_4'/>
4. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Adoptive Sonship.</hi>&mdash;The formal effects of
sanctifying grace culminate in the elevation of
man to the rank of an adopted child of God (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>filius
Dei adoptivus</foreign>), with a claim to the paternal inheritance,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the beatific vision in Heaven. This
truth is so clearly stated in Scripture and Tradition
that its denial would be heretical. The Tridentine
Council summarily describes justification
as <q>the state of grace and of the adoption of the
sons of God,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI, cap.
4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... status gratiae et adoptionis
filiorum Dei.</foreign></q></note> The teaching of Holy Scripture
can be gathered from such texts as the following.
Rom. VIII, 15 sqq.: <q>... You have received
the spirit of adoption of sons, whereby we cry:
Abba (Father). For the spirit himself giveth
testimony to our spirit, that we are the sons of
God. And if sons, heirs also; heirs indeed of God,
and joint heirs with Christ.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. VIII, 15 sqq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Accepistis ...
spiritum adoptionis filiorum,
in quo clamamus Abba,
Pater; ipse enim Spiritus testimonium
reddit spiritui nostro, quod
sumus filii Dei; si autem filii, et
haeredes: haeredes quidem Dei, cohaeredes
autem Christi.</foreign></q></note> 1 John III, 1 sq.:
<q>Behold what manner of charity the Father hath
bestowed upon us, that we should be called, and
should be the sons of God.... Dearly beloved,
we are now the sons of God.</q><note place='foot'>1 John III,
1 sq.: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Videte,
qualem caritatem dedit nobis Pater,
ut filii Dei nominemur et simus ...
Carissimi, nunc filii Dei sumus.</foreign></q></note> Gal. IV, 5:
<q>... that we might receive the adoption of
sons.</q><note place='foot'>Gal. IV, 5:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... ut adoptionem
filiorum reciperemus.</foreign></q></note> That the just become the adopted
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
sons of God follows likewise as a corollary
from the doctrine of regeneration so frequently
taught by Scripture. This regeneration
is not a procession of the soul from the divine
essence, but a kind of accidental and analogical
procreation substantially identical with adoption
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>filiatio adoptiva</foreign>,
υἱοθεσία). Cfr. John I, 12 sq.:
<q>... He gave them power to be made the sons
of God, ... who are born ... of God.</q><note place='foot'>John I, 12 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... dedit eis
potestatem filios Dei fieri, qui ...
ex Deo nati sunt</foreign> (ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς
ἐξουσίαν τέκνα Θεοῦ γενέσθαι, τοῖς ...
ἐκ Θεοῦ ἐγεννήθησαν).</q></note>
</p>

<p>
a) St. Thomas defines adoption as <q>the gratuitous acceptance
of a child of other parents to be the same as
one's own child and heir.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>,
3a, qu. 23, art.
1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Adoptio est personae extraneae
in filium et haeredem gratuita
assumptio.</foreign></q></note> Adoption implies (1) that
the adopted child be a stranger to the adopting father;
(2) that it have no legal claim to adoption; (3) that it
give its consent to being adopted; (4) that it be received
by the adopting father with parental love and affection.
All these elements are present, in a far higher and more
perfect form, in the adoption of a soul by God.
</p>

<p>
(1) The rational creature, as such, is not a <q>son</q> but
merely a <q>servant of God,</q><note place='foot'>Cfr. Gal. IV, 7:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Itaque iam
non est servus, sed filius; quod si
filius, et haeres per Deum.</foreign></q></note> and, if he be in the state
of mortal sin, His enemy.
</p>

<p>
(2) That adoption is a gratuitous favor on the part of
the Almighty, follows from the fact that the adopted
creature is His enemy and that grace is a free supernatural
gift, to which no creature has a natural claim.
Adoption furthermore implies the right of inheritance.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Rom. VIII, 17; Gal. IV, 7.</note>
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
The heritage of the children of God is a purely
spiritual possession which can be enjoyed simultaneously
by many, and consequently excels every natural heritage.
Men, as a rule, do not distribute their property during
life, while, after their death, it is usually divided up
among several heirs.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Thomas,
<hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>,
3a, qu. 23, art. 1, ad 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
(3) Whereas adoption among men owes its existence
to the desire of offspring on the part of childless parents,
the adoption of the soul by God springs from pure benevolence
and unselfish love, and for this reason presupposes
(in the case of adults) the free consent of
the adopted. No one can become an adopted son of
God against his will.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI,
cap. 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... per voluntariam
susceptionem gratiae et donorum.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
(4) Whereas human adoption supposes substantial
equality between father and child, and therefore at best
amounts to no more than a legal acceptance, adoption by
God elevates the soul to a higher level by allowing it to
participate in the Divine Nature, and consequently is a
true (even though merely an accidental and analogical) regeneration
in God.
</p>

<p>
b) From what we have said it follows&mdash;and this is a
truth of considerable speculative importance&mdash;that there
are essential points of difference as well as of resemblance
between Jesus Christ, the true Son of God, and the justified
sinner adopted by the Heavenly Father.
</p>

<p>
α) The difference between the <q>natural Son of God</q>
and an <q>adopted son</q> is exactly like that between God
and creature. The Logos-Son, engendered by eternal
generation from the divine substance, is the true natural
Son of the Father, the Second Person of the Divine
Trinity, and Himself God.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>The Divine
Trinity</hi>, pp. 49 sqq.</note> The just man, on the
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
other hand, is a child of God merely by the possession
of sanctifying grace,<note place='foot'>Cfr. John III, 5 sq.; 2 Cor.
III, 18; Tit. III, 5 sqq.</note> which can be lost by mortal
sin and consequently is founded upon a free relation that
may be terminated by man as freely as it was entered
into between himself and God.
</p>

<p>
Intimately related to this distinction is another:&mdash;Christ
is the Son of the Father alone, the just man is
an adopted child of the whole Trinity.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St.
Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa Theologica</hi>,
3a, qu. 23, art. 2, ad. 2:
<q>For He [God the Father] is
Christ's father by natural generation;
and this is proper to him:
whereas He is our Father by a voluntary
operation, which is common
to Him and to the Son and the Holy
Ghost: so that Christ is not the Son
of the whole Trinity, as we are.</q></note> This fact does
not, however, prevent us from <q>appropriating</q> adoptive
sonship to each of the three Divine Persons according
to His peculiar hypostatic character:&mdash;the
Father as its author, the Son as its pattern, and the Holy
Ghost as its conveyor.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Thomas,
<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>, ad 2.</note> Now, if Christ, as the true Son
of God, is the efficient cause (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa
efficiens</foreign>) of that
adoptive sonship of which, as God, He is also the pattern-exemplar
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa exemplaris</foreign>), it follows that He cannot
be an adopted son of God. <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Christus
est incapax adoptionis</foreign>,</q>
as Suarez puts it.<note place='foot'>Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Incarnatione</hi>, disp.
49, sect. 2, n. 5.</note> To say that He is both the
natural and an adopted Son of God would be heretical.<note place='foot'>This
heresy is called Adoptionism;
for a refutation of it see
Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>Christology</hi>, pp. 196
sqq.</note>
Consequently, sanctifying grace, in Him, did not exercise
one of the functions it invariably exercises in the souls of
men, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> it did not make Him an adopted son of God.
</p>

<p>
β) It is to be noted, however, that the unique position
enjoyed by our Lord gives rise, not only to essential
distinctions but also to an equal number of analogies between
the Only-begotten Son of God and His adopted
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
sons. The first and most fundamental of these analogies
is the attribution of the common appellation <q>son of
God</q> both to Christ and to the just. Though Christ
is the only true Son of God, the Heavenly Father
has nevertheless charitably <q>bestowed upon us, that we
should be called, and should be, the sons of God.</q><note place='foot'>1 John
III, 1.</note> According
to John I, 13, Christ <q>gave power to be made the
sons of God</q> to them <q>who are born ... of God.</q>
Hence divine sonship formally consists in an impression
of the hypostatic likeness of the Only-begotten Son of
God, by which the soul in a mysterious manner becomes
an image of the Trinity, and especially of the Only-begotten
Son of God, who is the archetype and pattern-exemplar
of adoptive sonship. This hypostatic propriety
and exemplariness was the reason why the Second Person
of the Trinity became man.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>Soteriology</hi>, pp. 15 sqq.</note> That the soul of the
justified is transformed into <q>an image of the Son of
God</q> is expressly taught by the Greek Fathers. Thus
St. Cyril of Alexandria says: <q>Christ is truly formed
in us, inasmuch as the Holy Ghost impresses on us a
certain divine likeness by means of sanctity and justice....
But if any one is formed in Christ, he is formed into
a child of God.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Or. in Is.</hi>, II, 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
These considerations also explain the points of resemblance
between the adoptive sonship of God and the Holy
Eucharist. Being our Father by adoption, God is bound
to provide us with food worthy of a divine progenitor.
The food He gives us (the Holy Eucharist) corresponds
to our dignity as His children, sustains us in this sublime
relation, and at the same time constitutes the pledge of a
glorious resurrection and an eternal beatitude.
</p>

<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>

<p>
c) Is the adoptive sonship of the children of God constituted
entirely by sanctifying grace, or does it require
for its full development the personal indwelling in the
soul of the Holy Ghost?<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. infra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2_Article_3_No_4'>Art. 3, No. 4</ref>.</note>
This subtle question formed
the subject of an interesting controversy between Joseph
Scheeben and Theodore Granderath, S. J. Father
Granderath claimed on the authority of the Tridentine
Council that divine sonship is an inseparable function of
sanctifying grace, and through that grace alone, without
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inhabitatio
Spiritus Sancti</foreign>, constitutes the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>unica causa
formalis</foreign> of justification. Against this theory Dr.
Scheeben maintained with great acumen and, we think,
successfully, that sanctifying grace of itself alone, without
the aid of any other factor, not only completely justifies
the sinner but raises him to the rank of an adopted
son of God, though there is nothing to prevent us from
holding that the indwelling of the Holy Ghost forms the
climax of the process, and develops and perfects the
already existing <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>filiatio
adoptiva</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr. J. Scheeben, <q><hi rend='italic'>Kontroverse
über die Formalursache der Kindschaft
Gottes</hi>,</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Katholik</hi>, of
Mayence, 1883, I, pp. 142 sqq., II,
pp. 561 sqq.; 1884, I, 18 sqq. II, 465
sqq., 610 sqq.; Granderath, <q><hi rend='italic'>Kontroverse
über die Gotteskindschaft</hi>,</q>
in the Innsbruck <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für
kath. Theologie</hi>, 1881, pp. 283 sqq.,
1883, pp. 491 sqq., 593 sqq., 1884,
pp. 545 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
Petavius had contended<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Trinitate</hi>,
VIII, 4 sqq.</note> that the just men of the Old
Testament, though in the state of sanctifying grace, were
not adopted children of God, because the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>filiatio adoptiva</foreign>
is an exclusive privilege of those living under the Christian
Dispensation. This theory became untenable when
the Tridentine Council defined sanctity and adoptive sonship
as inseparable formal effects of sanctifying grace.
There can no longer be any doubt, therefore, that the
patriarchs, together with sanctifying grace also enjoyed
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
the privilege of adoptive sonship, though, as Suarez
observes,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S. Theol.</hi>, 3a, qu.
23, art. 3.</note>
adoptive sonship under the Old Covenant depended
both as to origin and value upon the adoptive sonship
of the New Testament, and therefore was inferior to
it in both respects.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Gal. IV, 7. On the subject
of the adoptive sonship of
the just the student may profitably
consult A. Rademacher, <hi rend='italic'>Die übernatürliche
Lebensordnung nach der
paulinischen und johanneischen
Theologie</hi>, pp. 97 sqq., Freiburg
1903.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Readings</hi>:&mdash;Scheeben, <hi rend='italic'>Lehrbuch der
Dogmatik</hi>, Vol. II, § 168
sqq., Freiburg 1878.&mdash;J. Kirschkamp, <hi rend='italic'>Gnade und Glorie in ihrem
inneren Zusammenhang</hi>, Würzburg 1878.&mdash;P. Hagg, <hi rend='italic'>Die Reichtümer
der göttlichen Gnade und die Schwere ihres Verlustes</hi>,
Ratisbon 1889.&mdash;Card. Katschthaler, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Sanctificante</hi>,
3rd ed., Salzburg 1886.&mdash;P. Einig, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, Part II,
Treves 1896.&mdash;Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>, Vol.
VIII, pp. 575 sqq., Mainz 1897.&mdash;Scheeben, <hi rend='italic'>Die Herrlichkeiten der
göttlichen Gnade</hi>, 8th ed., by A. M. Weiss, O. P., Freiburg 1908 (English
translation, <hi rend='italic'>The Glories of Divine Grace</hi>, 3rd ed., New York
<hi rend='italic'>s. a.</hi>).&mdash;Th. Bourges, O. P., <hi rend='italic'>L'Ordre
Surnaturel et le Devoir Chrétien</hi>, Paris 1901.&mdash;*B. Terrien,
<hi rend='italic'>La Grâce et la Gloire ou la
Filiation Adoptive des Enfants de Dieu Etudiée dans sa Réalité,
ses Principes, son Perfectionnement et son Couronnement Final</hi>,
2 vols., Paris 1897.&mdash;*P. Villada, <hi rend='italic'>De Effectibus Formalibus
Gratiae Habitualis</hi>, Valladolid 1899.&mdash;L. Hubert, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Sanctificante</hi>, Paris 1902.
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Article 3. The Supernatural Concomitants Of Sanctifying Grace</head>

<p>
Besides producing the effects described in the
preceding Article, sanctifying grace also confers
certain supernatural privileges, which, though not
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
of the essence of grace, are, in the present economy
at least, inseparably connected with it and
may therefore be regarded as its regular concomitants.
</p>

<p>
The existence of these privileges is established
by the fact that certain councils (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> those of
Vienne and Trent), couple <q>grace and gifts</q> in
their official definitions.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
p. <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>.</note> The doctrine is clearly
stated by the Roman Catechism as follows: <q>To
this [sanctifying grace] is added a most noble accompaniment
of all virtues, which are divinely
infused into the soul together with grace.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cat.
Rom.</hi>, P. II, c. 1, n. 51:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Huic [gratiae sanctificanti] additur
nobilissimus omnium virtutum
comitatus, quae in animam
cum gratia divinitus infunduntur.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
We will treat of the supernatural concomitants
of sanctifying grace in four theses.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis I: The three divine virtues of faith, hope,
and charity are infused into the soul simultaneously
with sanctifying grace.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Some theologians (notably Suarez, Ripalda, and De
Lugo) declare this thesis to be
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de fide</foreign>, while others
(Dom. Soto, Melchior Cano, and Vasquez) hold it
merely as certain. Under the circumstances it will be
safest to take middle ground by characterizing it
as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fidei
proxima</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. The Council of Trent teaches: <q>Man
through Jesus Christ, in whom he is ingrafted, receives,
in the said justification, together with the
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
remission of sins, all these [gifts] infused at once&mdash;faith,
hope, and charity.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>,
Sess. VI, cap. 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unde in ipsa iustificatione cum
remissione peccatorum haec omnia
simul infusa accipit homo per Iesum
Christum, cui inseritur, fidem,
spem et caritatem.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 800.) The question
whether the three theological virtues
are genuine <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus operativi</foreign>, must
be answered in the affirmative; but
its denial incurs no censure so long
as the distinction existing between
these habitual virtues and actual
grace is left intact. It is of faith
that habitual charity is infused simultaneously
with habitual grace.
Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI, can.
11: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis dixerit, homines iustificari ...
exclusâ gratiâ et caritate,
quae in cordibus eorum per Spiritum
Sanctum diffundatur atque
illis inhaereat, anathema sit.</foreign></q> On
the bearing of this definition see
Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Instit. Theol.</hi>, Vol. III, pp.
175 sq., Paris 1896; Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 315 sqq., Freiburg
1901.</note>
</p>

<p>
a) That theological charity, as a habit, is infused
together with sanctifying grace can be convincingly
demonstrated from Holy Scripture.
Cfr. Rom. V, 5: <q>... the charity of God is
poured forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, who
is given to us.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. V, 5:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Caritas Dei
(ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ Θεοῦ) diffusa est
(ἐκκέχυται) in cordibus nostris per
Spiritum Sanctum, qui datus est
nobis.</foreign></q></note> In connection with charity,
Holy Scripture frequently mentions faith. Cfr. 1
Cor. XIII, 2: <q>And if I should have ... all
faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have
not charity, I am nothing.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. XIII,
2: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et si habuero
omnem fidem, ita ut montes transferam,
caritatem autem non habuero,
nihil sum.</foreign></q></note> All three of the
theological virtues are expressly enumerated in 1
Cor. XIII, 13: <q>And now there remain faith,
hope, and charity, these three: but the greatest of
these is charity.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. XIII, 13:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nunc autem
manent fides, spes, caritas (πίστις,
ἐλπίς, ἀγάπη), tria haec; maior
autem horum est caritas.</foreign></q></note> Unlike certain other texts,
the one last quoted leaves no doubt that faith,
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
hope, and charity are to be conceived as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>dona
inhaerentia</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> habits or qualities inherent in the
soul. This interpretation is approved by the Fathers
and Scholastics.
</p>

<p>
b) St. Thomas proves the necessity of the three theological
virtues for salvation as follows: <q>In order that
we be properly moved towards our end [God], that end
must be both known and desired. Desire of an end includes
two things: first, hope of attaining it, because no
prudent man will aspire to that which he cannot attain;
and secondly, love, because nothing is desired that is not
loved. And hence there are three theological virtues,&mdash;faith,
by which we know God; hope, by which we trust to obtain Him; and
charity, by which we love Him.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones
Disputatae de Virtutibus
in Communi</hi>, art. 12: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ad
hoc autem, quod moveamur recte in
finem [scil. Deum], oportet finem
esse et cognitum et desideratum.
Desiderium autem finis duo exigit,
scil. fiduciam de fine obtinendo, quia
nullus sapiens movetur ad id quod
consequi non potest; et amorem finis,
quia non desideratur nisi amatum.
Et ideo virtutes theologicae sunt
tres, scil. fides quâ Deum cognoscimus,
spes quâ ipsum nos obtenturos
esse speramus, et caritas quâ eum
diligimus.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
When are the three theological virtues infused into the
soul? This is an open question so far as faith and hope
are concerned. Of charity we know that it is always infused
with habitual grace. Suarez contends that, when
the soul is properly disposed, faith and hope are infused
before justification proper, that is to say, in the process
leading up to it. St. Thomas and St. Bonaventure,
on the other hand, hold that faith and hope, like charity,
are infused at the moment when justification actually
takes place in the soul. This last-mentioned opinion is
favored by the Tridentine Council.<note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
Mortal sin first destroys sanctifying grace together with
the habit of charity that is inseparable from it. Faith
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
and hope may continue to exist in the soul, and if hope,
too, departs, faith may remain alone. But the loss of
faith invariably entails the destruction of hope and
charity.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis II: Together with sanctifying grace there
are also infused the supernatural moral virtues.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This proposition may be characterized as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sententia
communior et probabilior</foreign>. Though denied by some theologians,
it can claim a high degree of probability.<note place='foot'>This thesis is
not, however, so
certain that it would be wrong to
contradict it, as has actually been
done by Scotus, Durandus, and
others. Cfr. Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, VI,
9, 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
Proof. The infused moral virtues (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>virtutes
morales infusae</foreign>) differ from the theological virtues
in that they have for their immediate formal
object, not God Himself, but the creature in its
relation to the moral law.
</p>

<p>
The moral virtues may be reduced to four, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: prudence,
justice, fortitude, and temperance. These are
called the <q>cardinal</q> virtues; first, because they perfect
the principal faculties of the soul; secondly, because all
the other virtues may be scientifically deduced from
them.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 57 sqq. That
the cardinal virtues are four in
number, St. Thomas proves as follows:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>[Bonum rationis] potest
dupliciter considerari: uno modo,
prout habet rationein consiliabilis et
eligibilis, secundum quam ratio circa
illud operatur et sic est prudentia,
quae est media inter intellectuales
et morales; ... alio modo, secundum
quod habet rationem boni appetibilis.
Ad appetitum autem duo pertinent,
scil. actio et passio; passio
autem est in irascibili et concupiscibili.
Circa actiones ergo est iustitia,
circa passiones irascibiles est fortitudo,
circa passiones concupiscibiles
est temperantia. Et sic sunt quatuor
virtutes cardinales.</foreign></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Comment.
in Quatuor Libros Sent.</hi>, III,
dist. 33, qu. 2, art. 1, solut. 3.)</note> In the supernatural order the infusion of the
cardinal virtues and of the other virtues subordinate to
them has for its object the government of intellect and
will in their relation towards created things and the
guidance of these faculties to their supernatural end.
</p>

<p>
a) The existence of supernaturally infused
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
moral virtues is intimated in Wis. VIII, 7: <q>And
if a man love justice: her labors have great virtues;
for she teacheth temperance, and prudence,
and justice, and fortitude, which are such things
as men can have nothing more profitable in life.</q><note place='foot'>Wis.
VIII, 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et si iustitiam
quis diligit, labores huius
magnas habent virtutes; sobrietatem
enim et prudentiam docet [Deus]
et iustitiam et virtutem, quibus utilius
nihil est in vita hominibus.</foreign></q></note>
The teacher of the three cardinal virtues here
mentioned is <q>Divine Wisdom,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> God Himself,
and we may assume that He inculcates them
by the same method which He employs in infusing
the theological virtues of faith, hope, and charity.
</p>

<p>
Another relevant text is Ezechiel XI, 19 sq.:
<q>... and I will take away the stony heart out of
their flesh, and give them a heart of flesh, that
they may walk in my commandments, and keep
my judgments.</q><note place='foot'>Ez. XI, 19 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et auferam
cor lapideum de came eorum et dabo
eis cor carneum, ut in praeceptis
meis ambulent et iudicia mea custodiant.</foreign></q></note> Here Yahweh promises to
give the just men of the New Covenant a <q>heart
of flesh</q> as opposed to the <q>stony heart</q> of the
Jews. The meaning evidently is that a disposition
to do good will be a characteristic of the New Testament
Christians in contradistinction to the hardhearted
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
Old Testament Jews. He who has a
<q>heart of flesh</q> will walk in God's commandments
and keep His judgments. Hence <q>heart</q> signifies
the sum-total of all those habits which impel
and enable a man to lead a good life. Since it is
God Himself who gives the <q>heart of flesh,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
the moral virtues, it follows that they are supernaturally
infused.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Jer. XXXI, 33; Col. I, 10
sq.; 1 John II, 27.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) Some of the Fathers ascribe the moral virtues
directly to divine infusion.
</p>

<p>
Thus St. Augustine observes that the cardinal virtues
<q>are given to us through the grace of God.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In
Ps.</hi>, 83: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Istae virtutes
nunc in convalle plorationis per
gratiam Dei donantur nobis.</foreign></q></note> And St.
Gregory the Great says that the Holy Ghost does <q>not
desert the hearts of those who are perfect in faith, hope,
and charity, and in those other goods without which no
man can attain to the heavenly fatherland.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom.
in Ezech.</hi>, I, 5, n. 11:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In fide enim, spe atque caritate,
et in aliis bonis, sine quibus ad
coelestem patriam non potest perveniri, ...
perfectorum corda [Spiritus
Sanctus] non deserit.</foreign></q></note> St.
Thomas shows the theological reason for this by pointing
to the parallel that exists between nature and the supernatural.
<q>Effects,</q> he says, <q>must always be proportionate
to their causes and principles. Now all virtues,
intellectual and moral, which we acquire by our acts, proceed
from certain natural principles preëxisting in
us.... In lieu of these natural principles God confers
on us the theological virtues, by which we are directed to
a supernatural end.... Hence there must correspond
to these theological virtues, proportionally, other habits
caused in us by God, and which bear the same relation to
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
the theological virtues that the moral and intellectual virtues
bear to the natural principles of virtue.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 63,
art. 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Oportet effectus esse suis
causis et principiis proportionatos.
Omnes autem virtutes tam intellectuales
quam morales, quae ex nostris
actibus acquiruntur, procedunt ex
quibusdam naturalibus principiis in
nobis praeexistentibus.... Loco
quorum naturalium principiorum
conferuntur nobis a Deo virtutes
theologicae, quibus ordinamur ad
finem supernaturalem.... Unde
oportet quod his etiam virtutibus
theologicis proportionaliter respondeant
alii habitus divinitus causati
in nobis, qui sic se habent ad virtutes
theologicas sicut se habent virtutes
morales et intellectuales ad principia
naturalia virtutum.</foreign></q> For further
information on this subject consult
Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>,
Vol. VIII, § 471, Mainz
1897; Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>,
pp. 319 sqq., Freiburg 1901; Van
Noort, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Christi</hi>, pp. 161
sqq., Amsterdam 1908.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis III: The seven gifts of the Holy Ghost are
also infused with sanctifying grace.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This proposition may be qualified as
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>probabilis</foreign>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Proof. The Church's teaching with regard to the seven
gifts of the Holy Ghost is based on Isaias XI, 2 sq.:
<q>And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him: the spirit
of wisdom, and of understanding, the spirit of counsel, and
of fortitude, the spirit of knowledge, and of godliness.
And he shall be filled with the spirit of the fear of the
Lord.</q> Four of these supernatural gifts (wisdom, understanding,
counsel, and knowledge) perfect the intellect
in matters pertaining to salvation, while the remaining
three (fortitude, godliness, and the fear of the Lord)
direct the will to its supernatural end. Are these seven
gifts, (or some of them), really distinct from the infused
moral virtues? Are they habits or habitual dispositions,
or merely transient impulses or inspirations? What are
their mutual relations and how can they be divided off
from one another? These and similar questions are in
dispute among theologians. The prevailing opinion is
that the gifts of the Holy Ghost are infused habitual dispositions,
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>realiter</foreign> distinct from the theological and
moral virtues, by which the soul is endowed with a supernatural
capacity for receiving the inspirations of the Holy Ghost
and a supernatural readiness to obey His impulses in all
important matters pertaining to salvation.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Gregory of Valentia, <hi rend='italic'>Comment.
in S. Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, disp. 5,
qu. 8, p. 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dona Spiritus S. potentias
animae perficiunt ad actiones
quasdam heroicas, ... quâ ratione
peculiariter procedunt ex divino
quodam Spiritus S. instinctu, quo
mens nostra plerumque mirabiliter
solet agi et impelli ad quaedam opera
praestantia et rara.... Atque ita
in usu donorum homo potius agitur,
in usu autem virtuturn se habet
potius ut agens.</foreign></q> Cfr. Simar, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmatik</hi>,
Vol. II, 4th ed., pp. 641 sqq.,
Freiburg 1899; Van Noort, <hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia Christi</hi>, pp. 174 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
That the gifts of the Holy Ghost are infused into the
soul simultaneously with sanctifying grace, can be
demonstrated as follows: Christ, as the mystical head, is
the pattern of justification for the members of His spiritual
body, who are united to Him by sanctifying grace.<note place='foot'>Rom.
VIII, 9 sqq.</note>
Now the Holy Ghost dwelled in Christ with all His gifts
as permanent habits.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Is. XI, 1 sqq.; LXI, 1;
Luke IV, 18.</note> Consequently, these gifts are imparted
by infusion to those who receive the grace of justification.
This is manifestly the belief of the Church,
for she prays in the <q><hi rend='italic'>Veni Sancte Spiritus</hi></q>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Shed upon thy faithful fold,</q></l>
<l>By unbounded hope controlled,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Thy seven gifts.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign
lang='la' rend='italic'>Da tuis fidelibus, in te confitentibus,
sacrum septenarium.</foreign></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Missale Rom.</hi>, Sequence for Whit
Sunday.) For a more detailed
treatment of the subject dealt with
in Thesis III consult J. Kleutgen,
<hi rend='italic'>Theologie der Vorzeit</hi>, Vol. II, 2nd
ed., pp. 365 sqq., Münster 1872; C.
Weiss, <hi rend='italic'>S. Thomae Aquinatis de Septem Donis Spiritus S. Doctrina</hi>,
Vienne 1895; J. Regler, <hi rend='italic'>Die sieben
Gaben des Hl. Geistes in ihrer
Bedeutung für das christliche Leben</hi>,
Ratisbon 1899; Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Divina</hi>, pp. 337 sqq., Freiburg 1901.
On the connection of the gifts of
the Holy Ghost with the beatitudes
(cfr. Matth. V, 3 sqq.) and the
<q>twelve fruits of the Holy Ghost</q>
(cfr. Gal. V, 22 sq.), see St.
Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae,
qu. 69 and 70. The student may
also consult Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, VI,
10, and Vasquez, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S.
Theol.</hi>, III, disp. 44, cap. 2.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis IV: The process of justification reaches its
climax in the personal indwelling of the Holy Ghost
in the soul of the just.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This thesis embodies what is technically called a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>propositio
certa</foreign>.
</p>

<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>

<p>
Proof. There are two ways in which God
may dwell in the soul, either by virtue of
His created grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inhabitatio
per dona accidentalia</foreign>,
ἐνοίκησις κατ᾽ ἐνέργειαν) or by virtue of His
uncreated substance (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inhabitatio substantialis sive
personalis</foreign>, ἐνοίκησις κατ᾽ οὐσίαν). The personal indwelling
of the Holy Ghost, therefore, may consist
in a twofold grace: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
creata</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia increata</foreign>,
of which the former is the groundwork
and necessary condition of the latter, while the
latter may be described as the climax and consummation
of the former.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Bonaventure, <hi rend='italic'>Compendium
Theol. Verit.</hi>, I, 9: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In iustificatione
duplex caritas nobis datur,
scil. creata et increata: illa quâ
diligimus, et illa quâ diligimur....
Ex his colligitur, quod licet Deus
sit in omnibus per essentiam, praesentiam
et potentiam, non tamen
habetur ab omnibus per gratiam.</foreign></q></note> The indwelling of the
Holy Ghost in the souls of the just is taught by
Holy Scripture and attested by the Fathers.
</p>

<p>
a) Holy Scripture draws a clear-cut distinction
between the accidental and the substantial indwelling
of the Holy Ghost.
</p>

<p>
α) Our Lord Himself, in addition to the charismata,
promised His Apostles the Holy Ghost
in Person. John XIV, 16 sq.: <q>... the Father ...
shall give you another Paraclete, that he
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>
may abide with you for ever, ... but you shall
know him, because he shall abide with you, and
shall be in you.</q><note place='foot'>John XIV, 16 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... alium
Paraclitum dabit vobis, ut maneat
vobiscum in aeternum.... Vos autem
cognoscetis eum, quia apud vos
manebit et in vobis (ἐν ὑμῖν) erit.</foreign></q></note> This promise was made to
all the faithful. Cfr. Rom. V, 5: <q>... the
charity of God is poured forth in our hearts by
the Holy Ghost, who is given to us.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. V, 5:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Caritas Dei
diffusa est in cordibus nostris per
Spiritum sanctum, qui datus est
nobis.</foreign></q></note> Hence
the Holy Ghost abides in the just and sets up His
throne in their souls. Cfr. Rom. VIII, 11:
<q>And if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from
the dead, dwell in you; he that raised up Jesus
Christ from the dead shall quicken also your mortal
bodies, because of his Spirit that dwelleth in
you.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. VIII, 11: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quodsi
Spiritus eius, qui suscitavit Iesum a
mortuis, habitat in vobis (οἰκεῖ ἐν
ὑμῖν), qui suscitavit Iesnm Christum
a mortuis, vivificabit et mortalia
corpora vestra propter inhabitantem
Spiritum eius in vobis (διὰ τοῦ
ἐνοικοῦντος αὐτοῦ πνεύματος ἐν
ὑμῖν).</foreign></q></note> By His indwelling our souls become
temples of God. 1 Cor. III, 16 sq.: <q>Know you
not that you are the temple of God, and that the
Spirit of God dwelleth in you?... For the temple of God is
holy, which you are.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nescitis,
quia templum Dei
(ναὸς Θεοῦ) estis et Spiritus Dei
habitat in vobis (οἰκεῖ ἐν ὑμῖν)?...
Templum enim Dei sanctum
est, quod estis vos.</foreign></q></note> 1 Cor. VI,
19: <q>Or know you not that your members are
the temple of the Holy Ghost, who is in you, whom
you have from God; and you are not your
own?</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. 6, 19: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>An nescitis,
quoniam membra vestra templum
sunt Spiritus S., qui in vobis est,
quem habetis a Deo et non estis
vestri?</foreign></q> Cfr. Rom. VIII, 9; Gal.
IV, 6; 2 Cor. VI, 16.</note>
</p>

<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>

<p>
β) Agreeable to this teaching of Scripture the
Fathers, especially those of the East, assert the
substantial indwelling of the Holy Ghost in the
souls of the just.
</p>

<p>
The fact that no one but God can dwell substantially
and personally in a creature was cited by the Greek Fathers
in their controversies with the Pneumatomachians
to prove the divinity of the Holy Ghost. St. Athanasius
writes to Serapion:<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep. ad
Serap.</hi>, I, n. 24.</note> <q>If we by receiving the Holy
Ghost are allowed to participate in the Divine Nature,
no one but a fool will assert that the Holy Ghost is not
of divine but of human nature. For all those in whom He
abides become deified<note place='foot'>θεοποιοῦνται.</note>
for no other reason. But if He
constitutes them gods, there can be no doubt that His
nature is divine.</q> St. Basil comments as follows on Ps.
LXXXI, 6 (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ego dixi,
dii estis</foreign>): <q>But the Spirit that
causes the gods to be gods, must be divine, and from God, ...
and God.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra Eunom.</hi>, I,
V.</note> St. Cyril of Alexandria<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Dialog.</hi>,
VII, <hi rend='italic'>per totum</hi>.</note> glowingly
describes the soul inhabited by the Holy Ghost as inlaid
with gold, transfused by fire, filled with the sweet odor
of balsam, and so forth.
</p>

<p>
The Latin Fathers, with one exception, are less definite
on this point. St. Augustine says that the Holy
Ghost <q>is given as a gift of God in such a way that He
Himself also gives Himself as being God,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Trinitate</hi>, XV, n. 36: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ita
enim datur sicut donum Dei, ut
etiam seipsum det sicut Deus.</foreign></q></note> and that
<q>the grace of God is a gift of God, but the greatest gift
is the Holy Spirit Himself, who therefore is called a
grace.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Serm.</hi>,
144, c. 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia
quippe Dei donum Dei est; donum
autem maximum ipse Spiritus Sanctus
est, et ideo gratia dicitur.</foreign></q></note>
Again: <q>... the Holy Spirit is the gift of
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
God, the gift being Himself indeed equal to the giver, and
therefore the Holy Ghost also is God, not inferior to the
Father and the Son.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Enchiridion</hi>,
c. 37: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et utique
Spiritus Sanctus Dei donum est,
quod quidem et ipsum est aequale
donanti; et ideo Deus est etiam
Spiritus Sanctus, Patre Filioque non
minor.</foreign></q> Additional Patristic texts
of like tenor in Petavius, <hi rend='italic'>De Trinitate</hi>,
l. VIII, cap. 4 sq.: Franzelin,
<hi rend='italic'>De Deo Trino</hi>, thes. 43; J. Kleutgen,
<hi rend='italic'>Theologie der Vorseit</hi>, Vol. II,
2nd ed., pp. 369 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) While theologians are unanimous in accepting
the doctrine of the personal indwelling of
the Holy Ghost in the just as clearly contained in
Sacred Scripture and Tradition, they differ in explaining
the manner in which He dwells in the
soul.
</p>

<p>
α) The great majority hold that the Holy Ghost can not
dwell in the soul, as the human soul dwells in the body,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per modum
informationis</foreign>, nor yet by a hypostatic union,
as godhead and manhood dwell together in the Person of
Christ; and that consequently His indwelling is objectively
an indwelling of the whole Trinity, which is appropriated
to the Third Person merely because the Holy Ghost is
<q>hypostatic holiness</q> or <q>personal love.</q> This view
is based on what is called <q>the fundamental law of the
Trinity,</q> <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: <q>In God all things are one except
where there is opposition of relation.</q><note place='foot'>Cfr.
Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>The Divine
Trinity</hi>, pp. 230 sqq.</note> Sacred Scripture
speaks of the personal indwelling of the Father
and the Son as well as of the Holy Ghost. Cfr. John
XIV, 23: <q>If any one love me, he will keep my word,
and my Father will love him, and we will come to him
and will make our abode with him.</q><note place='foot'>John XIV, 23:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis diligit
me, sermonem meum servabit, et
Pater meus diliget eum, et ad eum
veniemus et mansionem (μονήν)
apud eum faciemus.</foreign></q></note> St. Athanasius
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
concludes from these words that <q>the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>energia</foreign> of the
Trinity is one.... Indeed when the Lord says: I and
the Father will come, the Spirit also comes, to dwell in us
in precisely the same manner in which the Son dwells in
us.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep. 1 ad Serap.</hi>,
n. 30: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ex
his una Trinitatis ἐνέργεια ostenditur ...
profecto quum Dominus
ait: Veniemus ego et Pater, simul
venit Spiritus, non alio modo quam
ut Filius in nobis habitaturus.</foreign></q></note>
And St. Augustine teaches: <q>Love, therefore,
which is of God and is God, is properly the Holy Spirit,
by whom the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts,&mdash;that
love by which the whole Trinity dwells in us.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Trinit.</hi>, XV, 18, 32: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dilectio
igitur, quae ex Deo est et
Deus est, proprie Spiritus S. est,
per quem diffunditur in cordibus
nostris Dei caritas, per quam nos
tota inhabitat Trinitas.</foreign></q></note>
Accordingly, the personal indwelling of the Holy Ghost
consists in the state of grace as bearing a special relation to
the Third Person of the Trinity; the <q>higher nature</q>
which sanctifying grace imparts to the soul is not an
absolute but a relative form (σχέσις), by which the
soul is mysteriously united with the Three Divine Persons
and, by appropriation, with the Holy Ghost, thereby
becoming a throne and temple of God. It is in this sense
that the indwelling of the Holy Ghost in the soul is called
the climax of justification.<note place='foot'>For a more detailed treatment
see Franzelin, <hi rend='italic'>De Deo Trino</hi>, thes.
43-48, Rome 1881.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) Other eminent theologians (Petavius, Passaglia,
Schrader, Scheeben, Hurter, <hi rend='italic'>et al.</hi>) regard the explanation
just given as unsatisfactory. They contend that the
Fathers, especially those of the East, conceived the indwelling
of the Holy Ghost in the souls of the just, not
as an indwelling (ἐνοίκησις) of the Trinity, appropriated
to the Holy Ghost, but as a union (ἕνωσις) of the Holy
Ghost Himself with the soul.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Pseudo-Dionys. Areop., <hi rend='italic'>De
Hier. Eccl.</hi>, 1, § 3 (Migne, <hi rend='italic'>P. G.</hi>,
III, 376): Ἡ δὲ θέωσις ἐστιν ἡ
πρὸς Θεὸν ἀφομοίωσίς τε καὶ
ἕνωσις.</note> This union, they say, is
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
neither physical nor hypostatic, but an altogether unique
and inexplicable relation by which the soul is morally, accidentally,
and actively united to the person of the Holy
Ghost.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Petavius, <hi rend='italic'>De Trinit.</hi>, VIII,
7, 12: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ostendimus enim non
semel, coniunctionem illam Spiritus
S. neque φυσικήν neque ὑποστατικήν
esse, h. e. neque naturalem
neque personalem, quasi una fiat ex
ambobus natura vel persona. Non
enim quia et illi per adoptionis gratiam
filii Dei sunt, ait Augustinus
(In Ps. 67), ideo quisquam illorum
est unigenitus. Neque enim ex personarum
duarum copulatione unum
aliquid per sese, sed κατα συμβεβηκός
potest effici.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
γ) Unfortunately this exalted and mystic theory cannot
be squared with the theological principles underlying
the Catholic teaching on the Trinity, especially that portion
of it which concerns the appropriations and missions
of the three Divine Persons.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss,
<hi rend='italic'>The Divine
Trinity</hi>, pp. 244 sqq.</note> It is true that sanctifying
grace culminates in a communication of the Divine
Nature, and that this θείωσις is effected by imprinting upon
the soul an image of the divine processes of generation
and spiration,&mdash;the first by adoptive filiation, the second
by an indwelling of the Holy Ghost.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Scheeben,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Mysterien
des Christentums</hi>, 2nd ed., p. 165,
Freiburg 1898.</note> In fact all the
Trinitarian relations are reflected in the justification of the
sinner. Thus regeneration corresponds to the generation
of the Logos by the Father; adoptive sonship and the
accompanying participation of the soul in the Divine Nature
corresponds to our Lord's natural sonship and his
consubstantiality with the Father; the indwelling of the
Holy Ghost and His union with the soul, on the other
hand, corresponds to the divine process of Spiration, inasmuch
as it is preëminently a supernatural union of love
and effects a sort of mutual inexistence or perichoresis
of the soul in the Holy Ghost or the three Divine Persons
respectively.<note place='foot'>Cfr. John XIV, 23; XVII, 20
sqq.</note> Since, however, this union of the
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
soul with the substance of the three Divine Persons in
general, and the Holy Ghost in particular, is not a substantial
and physical but only an accidental and moral
union, the regeneration of the sinner must be conceived
as generation in a metaphorical sense only, divine sonship
as adoptive sonship, the deification of man as a
weak imitation of the divine <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>homoousia</foreign>,
and the indwelling
of the Holy Spirit in the soul as a shadowy analogue
of the Divine Perichoresis.<note place='foot'>Gutberlet takes middle ground
between the two theories and tries to
reconcile them. Cfr. Heinrich-Gutberlet,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische Theologie</hi>, Vol.
VIII, § 468. See also A. Rademacher,
<hi rend='italic'>Die übernatürliche Lebensordnung
nach der paulinischen und
johanneischen Theologie</hi>, pp. 193
sqq., Freiburg 1903.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Readings</hi>:&mdash;Deharbe, <hi rend='italic'>Die vollkommene
Liebe Gottes nach dem hl. Thomas von Aquin</hi>, Ratisbon 1856.&mdash;Marchant,
<hi rend='italic'>Die theologischen Tugenden</hi>, Ratisbon 1864.&mdash;Mazzella,
<hi rend='italic'>De Virtutibus Infusis</hi>,
4th ed., Rome 1894.&mdash;G. Lahousse, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>De Virtutibus
Theologicis</hi>, Louvain 1890.&mdash;S. Schiffini, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>Tractatus de
Virtutibus Infusis</hi>, Freiburg 1904.&mdash;J. Kirschkamp, <hi rend='italic'>Der Geist
des Katholizismus in der Lehre vom Glauben und von der Liebe</hi>,
Paderborn 1894.&mdash;C. Weiss, <hi rend='italic'>S. Thomae Aquinatis de Septem
Donis Spiritus Sancti Doctrina Proposita et Explicata</hi>, Vienna
1895.
</p>

<p>
On the indwelling of the Holy Ghost in the souls of the just
see A. Scholz, <hi rend='italic'>De Inhabitatione Spiritus Sancti</hi>, Würzburg
1856.&mdash;*Franzelin,
<hi rend='italic'>De Deo Trino</hi>, pp. 625 sqq., Rome 1881.&mdash;Oberdörffer,
<hi rend='italic'>De Inhabitatione Spiritus Sancti in Animabus Iustorum</hi>,
Tournai 1890.&mdash;* B. Froget, O. P., <hi rend='italic'>De l'Inhabitation du S. Esprit
dans les Âmes Justes d'après la Doctrine de S. Thomas d'Aquin</hi>,
Paris 1901.&mdash;De Bellevue, <hi rend='italic'>L'Oeuvre du S. Esprit ou la
Sanctification des Âmes</hi>, Paris 1901.
</p>

<p>
On the historic development of the dogma see Schwane,
<hi rend='italic'>Dogmengeschichte</hi>, 2nd ed., Vol. II, § 56-75, Freiburg 1895.
</p>
</quote>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_3'/>
<head>Section 3. The Properties Of Sanctifying Grace</head>

<p>
By a property (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>proprium</foreign>, ἴδιον) we understand
a quality which, though not part of the essence of
a thing, necessarily flows from that essence by
some sort of causation and is consequently found
in all individuals of the same species.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
R. F. Clarke, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>Logic</hi>, p. 174.</note> A property,
as such, is opposed to an accident (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>accidens</foreign>,
συμβεβηκός), which is neither part of, nor necessarily
attached to, the essence, but may or may not
be present in the individual. Thus the ability to
laugh is a property of human nature, whereas the
color of the skin is an accident.
</p>

<p>
How do the properties of grace differ from its
formal effects, and from its supernatural concomitants?
The formal effects of grace, as we have
seen, are the elements constituting its nature, the
properties are determinations necessarily flowing
from that nature, while the supernatural concomitants
are free gifts superadded by God.
</p>

<p>
According to the Protestant theory, justification is absolutely
certain, equal in all men, and incapable of being lost.
The Catholic Church, on the contrary, teaches that justification
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
is (1) uncertain, (2) unequal, and (3) amissible.
We will explain this teaching in three theses.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis I: No man knows with certainty of faith
whether he is justified or not.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This proposition is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de fide</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. The Tridentine Council rejected the
<q>fiduciary faith</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fides
fiducialis</foreign>,</q> <hi rend='italic'>v. supra</hi>, pp.
<ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> sqq.</note> of Luther as <q>an empty heretical
confidence,</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 9; Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 684.</note> and in three distinct canons denied
the properties attributed to faith by the early
Protestant dogmaticians.<note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 13-15; Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 823 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
a) Holy Scripture again and again warns us
that we can never be sure of our salvation. St.
Paul, though himself <q>a vessel of election,</q> freely
admits: <q>I am not conscious to myself of any
thing, yet I am not hereby justified; but he that
judgeth me is the Lord,</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. IV, 4:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nihil enim mihi
conscius sum, sed non in hoc iustificatus
sum; qui autem iudicat me,
Dominus est.</foreign></q></note> and declares: <q>I chastise
my body and bring it into subjection, lest perhaps,
when I have preached to others, I myself
should become a castaway.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. IX, 27:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Castigo corpus
meum et in servitutem redigo, ne
forte, quum aliis praedicaverim, ipse
reprobus (ἀδόκιμος) efficiar.</foreign></q></note> He exhorts the
faithful to work out their salvation <q>with fear and
trembling.</q><note place='foot'>Phil. II, 12:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cum metu et
tremore vestram salutem operamini.</foreign></q>
Other Scriptural texts in Bellarmine,
<hi rend='italic'>De Iustificatione</hi>, III, 4 sqq. For
the solution of certain exegetical
difficulties see the same author, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi>, III, 9, and Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Instit. Theol.</hi>,
Vol. III, pp. 210 sqq., Paris 1896.</note>
</p>

<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>

<p>
b) The Fathers also teach the uncertainty of
justification in the individual, and attribute it to
the fact that, while we know that God pardons
penitent sinners, no man can be entirely certain
that he has complied with all the conditions necessary
for justification.
</p>

<p>
<q>Our fate,</q> says St. Chrysostom, <q>is uncertain for
a number of reasons, one of which is that many of our
own works are hidden from us.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom. in
I. Epist. ad Cor.</hi>, 2.</note> St. Jerome, commenting
on Eccles. IX, 1 sq.,<note place='foot'>Eccles. IX, 1 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nescit
homo, utrum amore an odio dignus,
etc.</foreign></q></note> observes: <q>In the future they
will know all, and all things are manifest to them, that
is to say, the knowledge of this matter will precede them
when they depart this life, because <emph>then</emph> the judgment will
be pronounced, while <emph>now</emph> we are still battling, and it is
now uncertain whether those who bear adversities, bear
them for the love of God, like Job, or because they hate
Him, as do many sinners.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hieronymus in
h. l.</hi> (Migne, <hi rend='italic'>P.
L.</hi>, XXIII, 1080): <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In futuro
igitur scient omnia et in vultu eorum
sunt omnia, i.e. antecedet eos, quum
de hac vita decesserint, notitia istius
rei quia tunc est iudicum et nunc
certamen. Et quicunque adversa
sustinent, utrum per amorem Dei
sustineant, ut Iob, an per odium, ut
plurimi peccatores, nunc habetur
incertum.</foreign></q></note> Pope St. Gregory the Great
said to a noble matron who asked him whether she could
be sure of her salvation: <q>You ask me something which
is both useless and difficult [to answer]; difficult, because
I am unworthy to receive a revelation; useless, because it
is better that you be uncertain with regard to your sins, lest in your last
hour you should be unable to repent.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>,
VII, 25: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Rem et inutilem
et difficilem postulasti: difficilem
quidem, quia ego indignus sum, cui
revelatio fieri debeat; inutilem vero,
quia secura de peccatis tuis fieri non
debes, nisi quum iam in die vitae tuae
ultimo plangere eadem peccata minime
valebis.</foreign></q> The Patristic argument
is more fully developed by
Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De Iustif.</hi>, III, 7.</note>
</p>

<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>

<p>
c) We now proceed to the theological explanation
of the dogma embodied in our thesis.
</p>

<p>
α) The purpose of this dogma is not, as Harnack<note place='foot'><hi
rend='italic'>Dogmengeschichte</hi>, Vol. III, p.
617.</note>
thinks, <q>partly to assuage and partly to excite the restlessness
that still remains, by means of the sacraments, indulgences,
liturgical worship and ecclesiastical encouragement
of mystical and monkish practices,</q> but to prevent undue
security and careless assurance. What the Church condemns,
in accordance with Sacred Scripture and Tradition,
is the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>certitudo
fidei</foreign>, that vain confidence which leads
men to feel certain that they are in the state of grace
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inanis fiducia</foreign>),
not the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>certitudo spei</foreign>,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> humble
trust in God's abundant mercy. <q>As no pious person
ought to doubt of the mercy of God, of the merit of Christ,
and of the virtue and efficacy of the sacraments,</q> says the
Tridentine Council, <q>even so each one, when he regards
himself and his own weakness and indisposition, may
have fear and apprehension touching his own grace; seeing
that no one can know with a certainty of faith, which
cannot be subject to error, that he has obtained the grace
of God.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI, cap.
9: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sicut nemo pius de Dei misericordia,
de Christi merito deque
sacramentorum efficacia dubitare
debet, sic quilibet, dum seipsum
suamque propriam infirmitatem et
indispositionem respicit, de sua gratia
formidare et timere potest, quum
nullus scire valeat certitudine fidei,
cui non potest subesse falsum, se
gratiam Dei esse consecutum.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 802.)</note>
</p>

<p>
One needs but to apply to theology the epistemological
principles and criteria furnished by philosophy to perceive
that the Catholic dogma is as reasonable as the Protestant
theory is absurd. The Protestant syllogism: <q>I know
with a certainty of faith that the penitent sinner who
does his share, is justified through the grace of Christ;
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
now, I, who am a penitent sinner, know with a certainty
of faith that I have done my share; therefore, I know
with a certainty of faith that I am justified,</q> may be
formally correct, but the minor premise embodies a material
error, because no man knows with a certainty of
faith that he has done his share, unless it be specially
revealed to him by God. No matter how sure I may feel
of my own goodness, I have no certainty of faith, such
as that which Mary Magdalen had, or that which was
vouchsafed to the penitent thief on the cross, that I am
justified. It is one of the approved rules of syllogistic
reasoning that <q>the conclusion must follow the weaker
premiss.</q><note place='foot'><q><hi rend='italic'>Peirorem sequitur semper
conclusio partem.</hi></q> Cfr. Clarke,
<hi rend='italic'>Logic</hi>, p. 322.</note> Hence, in the above syllogism the certainty
cannot be of faith, but human and moral only. We do
not mean to deny that God may grant to this or that individual
a certainty of faith with regard to his justification;
in fact theologians expressly teach that in such a rare and
exceptional case the privileged person would be obliged to
believe in his own justification,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fide divinâ</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI,
can. 16: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis magnum illud
usque in finem perseverantiae
donum se certo habiturum absolutâ
et infallibili certitudine dixerit, nisi
hoc speciali revelatione didicerit,
anathema sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 826.)</note>
</p>

<p>
β) Can any one, without a special revelation, be <emph>theologically</emph>
certain that he is justified? Theological certainty
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>certitudo
theologica</foreign>) is the result of a syllogism
which embodies an article of faith in one of its premises
and an obvious truth of reason in the other. Ambrosius
Catharinus<note place='foot'>In his little treatise <hi rend='italic'>De Certitudine
Gratiae</hi>.</note> stands alone among Catholic theologians in
holding that there are rare cases in which men do
have a theological certainty as to their justification without
a private revelation. All other writers deny the
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
possibility: (1) because Scripture and Tradition do not
countenance the proposition; (2) because there are no
criteria available for such certainty outside of private
revelation, and (3) because the Tridentine Council censured
the assertion <q>that they who are truly justified
must needs, without any doubt whatever, settle within
themselves that they are justified.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 9:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... iustificatos
absque ulla dubitatione apud
semetipsos statuere, se esse iustificatos.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
γ) For precisely the same reasons no man can be
<emph>metaphysically</emph> certain of his own justification. Hence
there remains only <emph>moral</emph> certainty. Moral certainty
admits of varying degrees. The highest degree of moral
certainty concerning justification can be had in the case of
baptized infants, though, of course, we can never be
metaphysically certain even in regard to them, because
there is always room for doubt as to the intention of the
minister and the validity of the matter and form
employed in the administration of the sacrament. In the
case of adults, certainty regarding justification varies in
proportion to the measure in which it can be ascertained
whether one has complied with all the requirements demanded
by God. However, certainty may be so great as
to exclude all reasonable doubt. St. Paul says: <q>I am
sure that neither death nor life ... shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. VIII, 38 sq.: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Certus
sum enim (πέπεισμαι=persuasum
habeo), quia neque mors neque vita ...
poterit nos separare a caritate
Dei, quae est in Christo Iesu.</foreign></q></note> And St. Augustine: <q>What do we know?
We know that we have passed from death to life.
Whence do we know this? Because we love our brethren.
Let no one ask another. Let each question his own
heart; if he there finds fraternal charity, let him be sure
that he has passed from death to life.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Tract.
in Ioa.</hi>, I, 3, 5, n. 10:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quid nos scimus? Quia transivimus
de morte ad vitam. Unde
scimus? Quia diligimus fratres.
Nemo interroget hominem, redeat
unusquisque ad cor suum; si ibi
invenerit caritatem fraternam, securus
sit, quia transiit a morte ad
vitam.</foreign></q></note> This teaching
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
has led theologians to set up certain criteria by which the
faithful may be relieved of unreasonable anxiety and
obtain some sort of assurance as to the condition of
their souls. Such criteria are: a taste for things spiritual;
contempt of earthly pleasures; zeal and perseverance
in doing good; love of prayer and pious meditation; patience
in suffering and adversity; a fervent devotion to
the Blessed Virgin Mary; frequent reception of the sacraments,
etc.<note place='foot'>Cfr. the <hi rend='italic'>Imitation of Christ</hi> by
Thomas à Kempis, III, 54 sqq. On
the whole subject of this subdivision
the student may profitably consult
the <hi rend='italic'>Summa Theologica</hi> of St.
Thomas, 1a 2ae, qu. 112, art. 5;
Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, IX, 9-11, and
Billuart, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, diss. 6, art. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_3_Thesis_II'/>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis II: Sanctifying grace admits of degrees and
therefore can be increased by good works.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Both propositions contained in this thesis are
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de fide</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Proof. The Protestant contention that the
grace of justification is shared in an equal measure
by all the justified, was a logical deduction
from Luther's false principle that men are justified
by faith alone through the external justice of
Christ. If this were true, good works would be
superfluous, and all Christians would enjoy an
equal measure of grace. Luther formally asserted
this in his sermon on the nativity of the
Blessed Virgin: <q>All we who are Christians are equally great
and holy with the Mother of God.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Serm. de
Nativitate Mariae</hi>:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnes Christiani aeque magni
sumus sicut mater Dei, et aeque
sancti sicut ipsa.</foreign></q></note>
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
The Catholic Church rejects this teaching. She
holds that justification is an intrinsic process by
which the justice and holiness of Christ becomes
our own through sanctifying grace, and that consequently
sanctifying grace may be present in the
soul in a greater or less degree, according to the
liberality of God and the disposition of the individual
Christian, and those who are in the state of
grace may augment it by good works. The Council
of Trent formally defines these truths when
it says: <q>[We receive] justice within us, each
one according to his own measure, which the Holy
Ghost distributes to every one as He wills, and according
to each one's proper disposition and coöperation.</q><note place='foot'>Sess.
VI, cap. 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Iustitiam
in nobis recipientes, unusquisque
suam secundum mensuram, quam
Spiritus Sanctus partitur singulis
prout vult, et secundum propriam
cuiusque dispositionem et cooperationem.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
799.)</note>
And: <q>[The justified], faith coöperating
with good works, increase in that
justice which they have received through the
grace of Christ, and are still further justified....</q><note place='foot'>Sess.
VI, cap. 10: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Iustificati ...
in ipsa iustitia per Christi
gratiam accepta, cooperante fide
bonis operibus crescunt atque magis
iustificantur.</foreign></q>  (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 803.)</note>
The second and more important of
these truths is re-iterated and emphasized in the
canons of Session VI: <q>If anyone saith that the
justice received is not preserved and also increased
before God through good works, but that those
works are merely the fruits and signs of justification
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
obtained, but not a cause of the increase
thereof: let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess.
VI, can. 24: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, iustitiam acceptam non conservari
atque etiam augeri coram
Deo per bona opera, sed opera ipsa
fructus solummodo et signa esse
iustificationis adeptae, non autem
ipsius augendae causam, anathema
sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 834.)</note>
</p>

<p>
a) The Tridentine Fathers base their teaching
on a number of Scriptural texts which either expressly
declare or presuppose that grace is capable
of being increased in the soul after justification.
</p>

<p>
Thus we read in Prov. IV, 18: <q>The path of
the just, as a shining light, goeth forwards and
increaseth even to perfect day.</q><note place='foot'>Prov.
IV, 18: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Iustorum autem
semita quasi lux splendens procedit
et crescit usque ad perfectam
diem.</foreign></q></note> Ecclus.
XVIII, 22: <q>Let nothing hinder thee from
praying always, and be not afraid to be justified
even to death: for the reward of God continueth
for ever.</q><note place='foot'>Ecclus. XVIII, 22:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non impediaris
orare semper et ne verearis
usque ad mortem iustificari, quoniam
merces Dei manet in aeternum.</foreign></q></note> 2 Pet. III, 18: <q>Grow in grace
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ.</q><note place='foot'>2 Pet. III, 18:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Crescite vero
in gratia et in cognitione Domini
nostri et Salvatoris Iesu Christi.</foreign></q></note> 2 Cor. IX, 10: <q>[God] will
increase the growth of the fruits of your justice.</q><note place='foot'>2 Cor.
IX, 10: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>[Deus] augebit
incrementa frugum iustitiae
vestrae.</foreign></q></note>
Eph. IV, 7: <q>But to every one of us is
given grace, according to the measure of the giving
of Christ.</q><note place='foot'>Eph. IV, 7:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unicuique autem
nostrum data est gratia secundum
mensuram donationis Christi.</foreign></q></note> Apoc. XXII, 11 sq.: <q>He
that is just, let him be justified still; and he that
is holy, let him be sanctified still. Behold, I come
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
quickly, and my reward is with me, to render to
every man according to his works.</q><note place='foot'>Apoc. XXII, 11 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Qui
iustus est, iustificetur adhuc, et
sanctus sanctificetur adhuc. Ecce
venio cito et merces mea mecum
est, reddere unicuique secundum
opera sua.</foreign></q> Cfr. Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De
Iustific.</hi>, III, 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
Such texts could easily be multiplied.
</p>

<p>
b) Tradition found definite utterance as early
as the fourth century.
</p>

<p>
When Jovinian attempted to revive the Stoic theory
of the absolute equality of all virtues and vices, he met
with strenuous opposition on the part of St. Jerome,
who wrote a special treatise <hi rend='italic'>Contra Iovinianum</hi>, in which
he said: <q>Each of us receives grace according to the
measure of the grace of Christ (Eph. IV, 7); not as if
the measure of Christ were unequal, but so much of His grace is infused into
us as we are capable of receiving.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra
Iovin.</hi>, II, n. 23:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unicuique nostrum data est gratia
iuxta mensuram gratiae (Eph. 4, 7);
non quod mensura Christi diversa
sit, sed tantum gratiae eius infunditur,
quantum valemus haurire</foreign>.</q></note>
St. Augustine teaches that the just are as
unequal as the sinners. <q>The saints are clad with justice
(Job XXIX, 14), some more, some less; and no one on
this earth lives without sin, some more, some less: but the
best is he who has least.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>,
167, n. 13: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Induti sunt
sancti iustitiâ (Job 29, 14), alius
magis, alius minus; et nemo hic vivit
sine peccato et hoc alius magis, alius
minus: optimus autem est qui minimum.</foreign></q></note> But, we are told, life as
such is not capable of being increased; how then can
there be an increase of spiritual life? St. Thomas answers
this objection as follows: <q>The natural life pertains
to the substance of man, and therefore can be neither
augmented nor diminished; but in the life of grace man
participates <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>accidentaliter</foreign>,
and consequently he can possess
it in a larger or smaller degree.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 112,
art. 4, ad 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vita naturalis pertinet
ad substantiam hominis, et
ideo non recipit magis et minus;
sed vitam gratiae participat homo
accidentaliter, et ideo eam potest
homo magis vel minus habere.</foreign></q> On
the teaching of Tradition cfr. Alb.
a Bulsano, <hi rend='italic'>Instit. Theol. Dogmat.</hi>,
ed. G. a Graun, O. Cap., Vol. II,
p. 254, Innsbruck 1894.</note>
</p>

<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>

<p>
c) From what we have said it is easy to understand
the distinction which theologians make between
justification as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
prima</foreign> and justification
as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
secunda</foreign>. The latter is merely another
term for an increase of grace after justification.
</p>

<p>
α) Such an increase may be effected either <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex
opere operantis</foreign>, that is, by good works, or
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex opere
operato</foreign>, through the sacraments, and is called justification
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>iustificatio</foreign>, δικαίωσις) partly because
Sacred Scripture refers to it by that name<note place='foot'>Ecclus. XVIII, 22; Apoc.
XXII, 11.</note> and
partly because <q>to become just</q>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>iustum fieri</foreign>) and
<q>to become more just</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>iustiorem
fieri</foreign>) both
imply true sanctification.
</p>

<p>
In this connection the question may be raised whether
sanctifying grace is diminished by venial sin. Venial sin
does not destroy the state of grace and consequently
cannot augment or diminish grace. To assume that it
could, would lead to the absurd conclusion that a definite
number of venial sins might eventually grow into a mortal
sin, or that repeated venial sins gradually diminish grace
until finally it disappears. The first-mentioned assumption
is impossible because venial differs generically from
mortal sin, and a transition from the one to the other
would be a μετάβασις εἰς ἄλλο γένος. The second assumption
would entail the heretical inference that the state of
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
grace can be lost without mortal sin.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Vasquez,
<hi rend='italic'>Comment. in
Summam Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, disp. 221,
cap. 9, n. 77.</note> No doubt venial
sin influences the state of grace unfavorably; but this evil
influence must be conceived as indirect&mdash;by committing
venial sins man weakens his will-power, and temptation
eventually grows so strong as to make mortal sin inevitable.
<q>He that contemneth small things, shall fall little
by little.</q><note place='foot'>Ecclus. XIX, 1:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Qui spernit
modica, paulatim decidet.</foreign></q> For
a fuller treatment of this subject we
refer the student to St. Thomas,
<hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>, 2a 2ae, qu. 24, art.
10.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) If we inquire how sanctifying grace increases
in the soul, we find that the process must
be conceived as a growing intensity analogous to
that of light and heat in the physical order.
</p>

<p>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia prima</foreign>, as
we have seen in a previous chapter, is
a supernatural physical quality.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref> sqq.</note> Hence its increase,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia secunda</foreign>,
must be an increase of physical quality.
Such an increase is called in Scholastic parlance
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>intensio</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>Disp. Metaph.</hi>, l.
II, disp. 16.</note>
In what does this process consist? Certain Thomists<note place='foot'>The
authority of St. Thomas
himself can be invoked by neither
party to this controversy. Cfr.
Sylvius, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S. Theol.</hi>, 2a
2ae, qu. 24, art. 3.</note>
describe it as a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>maior
radicatio in subiecto</foreign>, while
the majority of theologians hold that it is simply an
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>additio gradus ad
gradum</foreign>. This latter explanation is
probably the correct one. Sanctifying grace is either
capable of gradual increase, or it is not. If it is, there is
no reason why God should deny such an increase under
certain conditions. If it is not, Luther would have been
right in contending that a newly baptized infant enjoys
the same measure of holiness as the Blessed Virgin Mary
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
or the human soul of our Divine Lord. It is impossible
to imagine how grace could produce a quantitatively
higher holiness by simply striking its roots deeper into
the soul.<note place='foot'>For a fuller treatment of this
topic see Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Instit. Theol.</hi>, Vol.
III, pp. 217 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
γ) A question of greater practical importance
is this: Is the increase of sanctifying grace accompanied
by a corresponding increase of the infused
virtues, and <hi rend='italic'>vice versa.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Every increase or decrease of sanctifying grace must
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>eo ipso</foreign>
entail a corresponding increase or decrease, respectively,
of theological charity. Charity is either
identical with grace or it is not.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> sqq.</note> If it is, an increase of
the one implies an increase of the other; if it is not, the
one cannot increase without an increase of the other, because
they are inseparable and related to each other as
nature to faculty, or root to blossom. Moreover, the
degree of heavenly glory enjoyed by a soul will be commensurate
with the measure of charity which it possessed
at death. Now grace and glory bear a proportional
relation to each other. Consequently, grace is augmented
as charity increases, and <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>. The same
argument applies to the infused moral virtues.
</p>

<p>
The case is different, however, with the theological
virtues of faith and hope. These may continue to exist
in the soul after charity has departed, and hence are not
inseparable from sanctifying grace and charity, nor from
the moral virtues. This consideration led Suarez to infer
that, as the theological virtues of faith and hope may be
infused into the soul independently of charity and before
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
justification, they must be susceptible of increase in the
course of justification without regard to the existing state
of grace and charity.<note place='foot'>Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia</hi>, IX, 2, 13.</note> This is true of the sinner. In
the justified, as Suarez himself admits, an increase of
grace (or charity) probably always entails an increase of
faith and hope,<note place='foot'>Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi>, IX, 4, 15.</note>&mdash;a proposition which finds strong support
in the decree of Trent which says: <q>This increase
of justification Holy Church begs, when she prays:
<q>Give unto us, O Lord, increase of faith, hope, and
charity.</q></q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 10:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hoc vero
iustitiae incrementum petit sancta
Ecclesia, quum orat: Da nobis, Domine,
fidei, spei et caritatis augmentum.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 803).
Cfr. De Lugo, <hi rend='italic'>De Fide</hi>, disp. 16,
sect. 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
δ) A final question forces itself upon the enquiring
mind, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: Is sanctifying grace capable
of an indefinite increase, or is there a limit beyond
which it cannot grow? In trying to find an
answer to this question we must draw a careful
distinction between the absolute and the ordinary
power of God.
</p>

<p>
There is no intrinsic contradiction in the assumption
that grace can be indefinitely augmented. True, it can
never become actually infinite, as this would involve an
absurdity.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 2a 2ae, qu. 24, art. 7.</note> But if we regard the power of God as He
sees fit to exercise it in the present economy
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>potentia
Dei ordinata</foreign>), we find that it is limited by two sublime
ideals of holiness to which neither man nor angel can
attain, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: the overflowing measure of sanctifying grace
in the human soul of our Lord Jesus Christ<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>Christology</hi>,
pp. 231 sqq.</note> and the
<q>fulness of grace</q> granted to His Mother.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>Mariology</hi>,
pp. 24 sqq.</note> Though
<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>
these ideals are beyond our reach, we must not be discouraged,
but try to approach them as nearly as possible.<note place='foot'>For a
more elaborate treatment
the reader is referred to Suarez,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, IX, 6, 11, and Schiffini,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 570 sq., Freiburg
1901.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='bold'>Thesis III: Sanctifying grace is lost by mortal sin.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This thesis also embodies an article of faith.
</p>

<p>
Proof. Calvin asserted that neither justification
nor faith can be lost by those who are predestined
to salvation, and that the unpredestined
are never truly justified. Luther held that justifying
grace is lost solely through the sin of infidelity.
Against the former the Council of Trent
declared: <q>If anyone saith that a man once justified
can sin no more, nor lose grace, and that
therefore he that falls and sins was never truly
justified; ... let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 23:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
hominem semel iustificatum dixerit
amplius peccare non posse neque
gratiam amittere atque ideo eum, qui
labitur et peccat, numquam vere fuisse
iustificatum; ... anathema sit.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 833.)</note> Against
the latter the same council defined: <q>If anyone
saith that there is no mortal sin but that of infidelity,
or that grace once received is not lost by any
other sin, however grievous and enormous, save
by that of infidelity, let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 27:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, nullum esse mortale peccatum
nisi infidelitatis, aut nullo alio
quantumvis gravi et enormi praeterquam
infidelitatis peccato semel acceptam
gratiam amitti, anathema
sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 837).</note> At
the same time, however, the Holy Synod expressly
declared that venial sin does not destroy the state
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
of grace: <q>For although during this mortal life,
men, how holy and just soever, at times fall into at
least light and daily sins, which are also called
venial, they do not therefore cease to be just.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 11:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Licet in
hac mortali vita quantumvis sancti
et iusti in levia saltem et quotidiana,
quae etiam venialia dicuntur, peccata
quandoque cadant, non propterea
desinunt esse iusti.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
a) This teaching is so obviously in accord with
Sacred Scripture that we confine ourselves to
quoting three or four passages. Ezechiel says
that sanctifying grace may be irretrievably lost:
<q>If the just man turn himself away from his justice,
and do iniquity according to all the abominations
which the wicked man useth to work, shall
he live? All his justices which he hath done shall
not be remembered; in the prevarication, by which
he hath prevaricated, and in his sin, which he
hath committed, in them he shall die.</q><note place='foot'>Ez. XVIII, 24:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si autem
averterit se iustus a iustitia sua, et
fecerit iniquitatem secundum omnes
abominationes, quas operari solet impius,
numquid vivet? Omnes iustitiae
eius, quas fecerat, non recordabuntur;
in praevaricatione, quâ
praevaricatus est, et in peccato suo,
quod peccavit, in ipsis morietur.</foreign></q></note> Our
Lord Himself admonishes His Apostles: <q>Watch
ye and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.</q><note place='foot'>Matth. XXVI, 41:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vigilate
et orate, ut non intretis in tentationem.</foreign></q></note>
St. Paul not only warns the faithful in general
terms: <q>He that thinketh himself to stand, let
him take heed lest he fall;</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. X, 12:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Qui se existitmat
stare, videat ne cadat.</foreign></q></note> but expressly designates
certain mortal sins as a bar to Heaven:
<q>Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers,
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
nor the effeminate, nor liers with mankind,
nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
railers, nor extortioners, shall possess the kingdom
of God.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. VI, 9 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nolite
errare, neque fornicarii neque idolis
servientes neque adulteri neque
molles neque masculorum concubitores
neque fures neque avari
neque ebriosi neque maledici neque
rapaces regnum Dei possidebunt.</foreign></q>
Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI, cap.
15 (Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 808).</note>
</p>

<p>
b) The teaching of Tradition was brought out
clearly in the fight against Jovinian.
</p>

<p>
That wily heretic claimed the authority of St. John for
the assertion that the grace of Baptism can never be lost.
The Johannean passage in question reads: <q>Whosoever
is born of God, committeth no sin: for His seed abideth
in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.</q><note place='foot'>1
John III, 9: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnis, qui
natus est ex Deo, peccatum non facit:
quoniam semen ipsius in eo
manet, et non potest peccare, quoniam
ex Deo natus est.</foreign></q></note>
St. Jerome in his reply paraphrases the passage as follows:
<q>Therefore I tell you, my little children, whosoever is
born of God, committeth no sin, in order that you may
not sin and that you may know that you will remain sons of God so long
as you refrain from sin.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra Iovin.</hi>,
1. II: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Propterea
scribo vobis, filioli mei, omnis
qui natus est ex Deo, non peccat,
ut non peccetis et tamdiu sciatis vos
in generatione Domini permanere,
quamdiu non peccaveritis.</foreign></q> On the
different interpretations of 1 John
III, 9, an admittedly difficult text,
see Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De Iustific.</hi>, III, 15.</note> St.
Augustine teaches: <q>If a man, being regenerate and
justified, relapses of his own will into an evil life, assuredly
he cannot say: <q>I have not received,</q> because of
his own free choice of evil he has lost the grace of God
that he has received.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Corrept.
et Gratia</hi>, c. VI,
n. 9: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si iam regeneratus et iustificatus
in malam vitam suâ voluntate
relabitur, certe iste non potest
dicere: Non accepti, quia acceptam
gratiam Dei suo in malum libero
amisit arbitrio.</foreign></q></note> And St. Gregory the Great:
</p>

<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>

<p>
<q>As he who falls away from the faith is an apostate, so
he who returns to an evil deed is regarded by Almighty
God as an apostate, even though he may seem to retain
the faith; for the one without the other can be of no use,
because faith availeth nought without [good] works,
nor [good] works without faith.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hom.
in Ez.</hi>, 9, 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sicuti
qui a fide recedit, apostata est, ita
qui ad perversum opus, quod deseruerit,
redit, ab omnipotente Deo
apostata deputatur, etiamsi fidem
tenere videatur; unum enim sine
altero nil prodesse valet, quia nec
fides sine operibus nec opera adiuvant
sine fide.</foreign></q></note> The penitential discipline
of the primitive Church furnishes additional
proofs for the doctrine under consideration. If grace
could be lost in no other way than by unbelief, the Sacrament
of Penance would be useless.<note place='foot'>For the solution of certain difficulties
see Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>,
pp. 591 sqq. On the penitential
discipline of the early Church
cfr. G. Rauschen, <hi rend='italic'>Eucharist and
Penance in the First Six Centuries</hi>,
pp. 152 sqq., St. Louis 1913.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) In connection with this subject theologians
are wont to discuss the question whether or not
the forfeiture of sanctifying grace involves the
loss of its supernatural concomitants.
</p>

<p>
Theological love or charity is substantially identical
with sanctifying grace, or at least inseparable from it,
and hence both are gained and lost together. This is
an article of faith. To lose sanctifying grace, therefore,
is to lose theological love. On the other hand, it is
equally <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de fide</foreign>
that theological faith (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>habitus fidei</foreign>) is not
destroyed by mortal sin;<note place='foot'>Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>,
Sess. VI, can. 28: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis dixerit, amissâ
per peccatum gratiâ simul et fidem
semper amitti, aut fidem quae remanet
non esse veram fidem, licet non
sit viva, aut eum qui fidem sine
caritate habet, non esse Christianum,
anathema sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 838.)</note> it can be lost only by the sin of
unbelief.<note place='foot'>Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI,
cap. 15: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non modo infidelitate,
per quam et ipsa fides amittitur, sed
etiam quocunque alio mortali peccato,
quamvis non amittatur fides,
acceptam iustificationis gratiam
amitti.</foreign></q></note> The same is true,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mutatis mutandis</foreign>, of theological
<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>
hope. True, the Church has not definitely declared
her mind with regard to hope, but it may be set
down as her teaching that hope is not lost with grace and
charity but survives like faith.<note place='foot'>Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Prop.
Quesnelli damn. a Clemente XI</hi>, prop. 57: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Totum
deest peccatori, quando ei deest spes,
et non est spes in Deo, ubi non est
amor Dei.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1407.)</note> The two contrary opposites
of hope are desperation and presumption, concerning
which theologians commonly hold that the
former destroys hope, while the latter probably does not.
But even if hope and charity are lost, faith may remain
in the soul like a solitary root, from which, under more
favorable conditions, new life is apt to spring. As regards
the infused moral virtues and the seven gifts of
the Holy Ghost (and, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a
fortiori</foreign>, His personal indwelling
in the soul),<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2'>Section 2</ref>.</note>
it is the unanimous teaching that these
disappear with sanctifying grace and charity, even
though faith and hope survive. The reason is that
these virtues and gifts are merely supernatural adjuncts
of sanctifying grace and cannot persist without it. <q><hi rend='italic'>Accessorium
sequitur principale.</hi></q><note place='foot'>The questions discussed in this
subdivision of our treatise are more
fully treated by Ripalda, <hi rend='italic'>De Ente
Supernaturali</hi>, disp. 128, sect. 4, and
by Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, IX, 3 sqq.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_III'/>
<head>Chapter III. The Fruits Of Justification, Or The Merit Of Good Works</head>

<p>
The principal fruit of justification, according
to the Tridentine Council,<note place='foot'>Sess. VI,
cap. 16.</note> is the meritoriousness
of all good works performed in the state of sanctifying
grace.
</p>

<p>
Merit (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum</foreign>), as we have explained in the
first part of this treatise,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
p. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</note> is that property of a
good work which entitles the doer to a reward
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praemium, merces</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
Ethics and theology distinguish two kinds of
merit: (1) condign merit or merit in the strict
sense of the term (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum adaequatum sive de
condigno</foreign>), and (2) congruous merit or quasi-merit
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum inadaequatum sive de congruo</foreign>).
Condign merit supposes an equality between service
and return. It is measured by commutative
justice and confers a strict claim to a reward.
Congruous merit, owing to its inadequacy and the
lack of strict proportion between service and
recompense, confers no such claim except on
grounds of equity.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> sqq.</note>
</p>

<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>

<p>
In this treatise we are concerned with merit
only in the theological sense of the term, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
supernatural merit. We shall consider (1) its
Existence,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Realitas
sive existentia meriti.</foreign></note> (2) its
Requisites,<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Conditiones
meriti.</foreign></note> and (3) its
Objects.<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Obiecta
meriti.</foreign></note>
</p>

<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_III_Section_1'/>
<head>Section 1. The Existence Of Merit</head>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Heretical Errors and the Teaching of
the Church.</hi>&mdash;a) The medieval Beguins and
Beghards held that man is able to attain such
a perfect state of holiness here below as no
longer to require an increase of grace or good
works.<note place='foot'>Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Conc. Viennense</hi>, A. D.
1311 (<hi rend='italic'>Clementin.</hi>, l. V, tit. 3: <q>De
Haereticis</q>) in Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 471 sqq.</note> Luther, holding that justification consists
in the covering up of sin and the external imputation
of the justice of Christ, consistently
though falsely asserted that <q>the just man sins
in every good work,</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In omni
opere bono iustus peccat.</foreign></q> <hi rend='italic'>Prop. Lutheri Damnatae
A. D. 1520 a Leone X</hi>, prop. 31
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 771).</note> that <q>a good work, no matter how well performed,
is a venial sin,</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Opus bonum,
optime factum
est veniale peccatum</foreign>.</q> Prop. 32, <hi rend='italic'>l.
c.</hi>, n. 772.</note>
and that <q>every work of the just deserves
damnation and is mortally sinful, if it be considered as it really is in
the judgment of God.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omne
opus iusti damnabile
est et peccatum mortale, si iudicio
Dei iudicetur.</foreign></q></note> Calvin rejected good works as <q>impurities
and defilements,</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Inquinamenta
et sordes.</foreign></q>
<hi rend='italic'>Instit.</hi>, III, 12, 4.</note>
which God covers with the cloak of
the merits of Jesus Christ and which He sometimes
rewards with temporal blessings but never
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>
with eternal life. Modern Protestantism has
given up or at least attenuated these harsh doctrines.<note place='foot'>Quietism
(Michael de Molinos
<hi rend='italic'>et al.</hi>) denied the meritoriousness
of good works performed in the
<q>state of passive repose</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quies</foreign>).</note>
</p>

<p>
b) The Church had defined her teaching on
this point centuries before the time of the <q>Reformers.</q>
Thus the Second Council of Orange
declared as early as 529: <q>Good works, when
performed, deserve a reward; but grace, which is
a free gift, precedes good works and is a necessary
condition of them.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Debetur
merces bonis operibus,
si fiant; sed gratia, quae non
debetur, praecedit ut fiant.</foreign></q> Can.
18 (Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 191.)</note> The Fourth Lateran
Council reiterated this doctrine: <q>Not only virgins
and those who practice continence, but the
married also, who please God by having the right
faith and performing good works, deserve to obtain
eternal happiness.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cap.
Firmiter</hi>: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non solum
autem virgines et continentes,
verum etiam coniugati per rectam
fidem et operationem bonam placentes
Deo ad aeternam merentur beatitudinem
pervenire.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 430.)</note> The Tridentine Council
goes into the matter at length in the sixteenth
Chapter of its Sixth Session, where we read
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inter alia</foreign>:
<q>And for this reason life eternal is to
be proposed to those working well unto the end
and hoping in God, both as a grace mercifully
promised to the sons of God through Jesus Christ,
and as a reward which is according to the promise
of God Himself to be faithfully rendered to their
good works and merits.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 16:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Atque
ideo bene operantibus usque in finem
et in Deo sperantibus proponenda
est vita aeterna et tamquam gratia
filiis Dei per Christum Iesum misericorditer
promissa et tamquam merces
ex ipsius Dei promissione bonis
ipsorum operibus et meritis fideliter
reddenda.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 809.)</note>
</p>

<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>

<p>
The same Council formally condemned the Lutheran
position as heretical: <q>If anyone saith that in every
good work the just man sins at least venially, or, which is
more intolerable still, mortally, and consequently deserves
eternal punishments; and that for this cause only he is not
damned that God does not impute those works unto
salvation; let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 25:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
in quolibet bono opere iustum saltem
venialiter peccare dixerit, aut quod
intolerabilius est, mortaliter atque
ideo poenas aeternas mereri, tantumque
ob id non damnari quia Deus ea
opera non imputat ad damnationem,
anathema sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 835.)</note> The positive teaching
of the Church may be gathered from the following
condemnation: <q>If anyone saith that the just ought not,
for their good works done in God, to expect and hope for
eternal recompense from God through His mercy and the
merit of Jesus Christ, if so be that they persevere to the
end in well-doing and in keeping the commandments; let
him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 26:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, iustos non debere pro bonis
operibus, quae in Deo fuerint facta,
exspectare et sperare aeternam retributionem
a Deo per eius misericordiam
et Iesu Christi meritum, si
bene agendo et divina mandata custodiendo
usque in finem perseveraverint,
anathema sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 836.)</note> The existence of merit in the true
and proper sense of the term is specially emphasized as
follows: <q>If anyone saith that ... the justified, by the
good works which he performs through the grace of God
and the merit of Jesus Christ, whose living member he is,
does not truly merit increase of grace...; let him be
anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 32:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, ... ipsum iustificatum bonis
operibus, quae ab eo per Dei gratiam
et Iesu Christi meritum, cuius vivum
membrum est, fiunt, non vere mereri
augmentum gratiae, ... anathema
sit.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 842.)</note>
The quietistic errors of Michael de Molinos
<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>
were condemned by Pope Innocent XI, Nov. 20,
1687.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
1221 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Meritoriousness of Good Works
Demonstrated from Scripture and Tradition.</hi>&mdash;Both
Holy Scripture and Tradition employ
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>opus bonum</foreign>
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum</foreign> as reciprocal or
correlative terms.
</p>

<p>
a) In the Old Testament the good deeds of
the just are often declared to be meritorious in the
sight of God. Cfr. Wisd. V, 16: <q>But the just
shall live for evermore, and their reward is with
the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Wisd. V, 16:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Iusti autem in
perpetuum vivent et apud Dominum
est merces eorum.</foreign></q></note> Ecclus. XVIII, 22: <q>Be not afraid
to be justified even to death, for the reward of God
continueth for ever.</q><note place='foot'>Ecclus. XVIII, 22:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ne verearis
usque ad mortem iustificari,
quoniam merces Dei manet in aeternum.</foreign></q>
Cfr. Gen. XV, 1.</note> The New Testament
teaching culminates in the <q>eight beatitudes,</q>
each of which is accompanied by a special reward.
After enumerating them all, with the promises
attached to each, our Divine Saviour significantly
adds: <q>Be glad and rejoice, for your reward is
very great in heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Matth. V, 12:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gaudete et
exultate, quoniam merces vestra
copiosa est in caelis.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
St. Paul, who so strongly insists on the absolute gratuitousness
of Christian grace, nevertheless acknowledges the
existence of merits to which a reward is due from
God. Cfr. Rom. II, 6 sq.: <q>[God] will render to every
man according to his works, to them indeed who according
<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>
to patience in good work, seek glory and honor and
incorruption, eternal life.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. II, 6 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... qui
reddet unicuique secundum opera
eius, iis quidem, qui secundum patientiam
boni operis gloriam et honorem
et incorruptionem quaerunt,
vitam aeternam.</foreign></q></note> 2 Tim. IV, 7 sq.: <q>I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith. As to the rest, there is laid up for me a crown
of justice, which the Lord the just judge will render to
me in that day, and not only to me, but to them also
that love his coming.</q><note place='foot'>2 Tim. IV, 7 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Bonum
certamen certavi, cursum consummavi,
fidem servavi. In reliquo reposita
est mihi corona iustitiae, quam
reddet mihi Dominus in illa die iustus
iudex; non solum autem mihi,
sed et iis qui diligunt adventum
eius.</foreign></q> Cfr. 1 Cor. IX, 25.</note> 1 Cor. III, 8: <q>Every man
shall receive his own reward, according to his own
labor.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. III, 8:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unusquisque
autem propriam mercedem accipiet,
secundum suum laborem.</foreign></q></note> Col. III, 23 sq.:
<q>Whatsoever you do, do it
from the heart, as to the Lord, and not to men, knowing
that you shall receive of the Lord the reward of inheritance.</q><note place='foot'>Col.
III, 23 sq.: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quodcunque
facitis, ex animo operamini sicut
Domino et non hominibus, scientes
quod a Domino accipietis retributionem
haereditatis.</foreign></q></note>
The most eloquent exponent of the necessity
of good works is St. James, who also insists on their meritoriousness:
<q>Blessed is the man that endureth temptation;
for when he hath been proved, he shall receive the
crown of life, which God hath promised to them that
love him.</q><note place='foot'>Iac. I, 12:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Beatus vir, qui
suffert tentationem, quoniam, quum
probatus fuerit, accipiet coronam
vitae, quam repromisit Deus diligentibus
se.</foreign></q></note> In the Apocalypse Jesus says: <q>Be thou
faithful until death, and I will give thee the crown of
life.</q><note place='foot'>Apoc. II, 10:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Esto fidelis
usque ad mortem, et dabo tibi coronam
vitae.</foreign></q> For additional Scripture
texts see Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De Iustificatione</hi>,
V, 3, 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) The teaching of the Fathers is an effective
commentary on the Scriptural doctrine just expounded,
<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>
as may be seen from their homilies reproduced
in the Roman Breviary.
</p>

<p>
St. Ignatius of Antioch says: <q>Suffer me to be eaten by the beasts, through
whom I can attain to God.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep. ad Rom.</hi>,
IV, 1.</note> St.
Irenæus: <q>Precious should be to us the crown which
we gain in battle, ... and the more we obtain it by
combat, the more precious it is.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adv.
Haer.</hi>, IV, 37.</note> St. Ambrose: <q>Is
it not evident that the reward and punishment of
merits endure after death?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Offic.</hi>,
I, 15, 57: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nonne
evidens est, meritorum aut praemia
aut supplicia post mortem manere?</foreign></q></note> St. Augustine: <q>Eternal
life contains the whole reward in the promise of which
we rejoice; nor can the reward precede desert, nor be
given to a man before he is worthy of it. What can be
more unjust than this, and what is more just than God?
We should not then demand the reward before we deserve
to get it.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Moribus Ecclesiae</hi>, I, 25:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vita aeterna est totum praemium,
cuius promissione gaudemus, nec
praemium potest praecedere merita
priusque homini dari, quam dignus
est. Quid enim hoc iniustius et
quid iustius Deo? Non ergo debemus
poscere praemia, antequam
mereamur accipere.</foreign></q></note> And again: <q>As death is given, so to
speak, to reward the merit of sin, so eternal life is given
to reward the merit of justice, ... and hence it is also
called reward in many Scriptural passages.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.
ad Sixt.</hi>, 194, n. 20:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sicut merito peccati tamquam stipendium
redditur mors, ita merito
iustitiae tamquam stipendium vita
aeterna.... Unde etiam et merces
appellatur plurimis s. Scripturarum
locis.</foreign></q> Other Patristic texts inculcating
the meritoriousness of good
works performed in the state of
grace can be found in Bellarmine,
<hi rend='italic'>De Iustif.</hi>, V, 4, 6. For the solution
of objections raised against the
Patristic argument consult Schiffini,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 609 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) Theologically the meritoriousness of good
works is based on the providence of God. There
must be some sort of sanction to enforce the divine
laws,&mdash;not only the natural law
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lex naturae</foreign>),
<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>
but, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a fortiori</foreign>,
the <q>law of grace</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lex gratiae</foreign>),
as the supernatural order is so much more important
than the natural.
</p>

<p>
α) By the good works which he performs in the state of
sanctifying grace, and with the aid of actual
graces (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in
gratia et ex gratia</foreign>), man acquires a twofold merit,&mdash;he
helps to execute the divine plan of governance in regard
to his fellow-creatures and assists in furthering the external
glory of God, which is the ultimate purpose of creation.
For this he is entitled to a double reward, just as
the sinner is deserving of a double punishment for the injury
he does to his fellowmen and the dishonor he reflects
upon his Creator.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Thomas,
<hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>,
1a 2ae, qu. 21, art. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is objected against this argument that our supernatural
merits, being finite, are in no proportion to the possession
and enjoyment of an Infinite Good. This objection
vanishes in the light of the following considerations:
(1) Sanctifying grace is a kind of
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>deificatio</foreign>, which
raises man above himself to a quasi-divine dignity that
colors all his actions.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cfr.
Prop. Baii damn, a Pio V</hi>,
13 (Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 1013):
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Opera bona a filiis adoptionis facta
non accipiunt rationem meriti ex
eo, quod fiunt per Spiritum adoptionis
inhabitantem corda filiorum
Dei, sed tantum ex eo, quod sunt
conformia legi quodque per ea praestatur
obedientia legi.</foreign></q></note> (2) The ability of the justified to
perform supernaturally good works is based entirely upon
the infinite merits of Jesus Christ.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI,
cap. 16: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Absit, ut Christianus
homo in se ipso vel confidat vel
glorietur, et non in Domino, cuius
tanta est erga homines bonitas,
ut eorum velit esse merita, quae
sunt ipsius dona.</foreign></q></note> (3) The Infinite
Good is possessed by the creature, not in an infinite but
in a merely finite manner. Hence there <emph>is</emph> a due proportion
between good works and merit.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Florent.</hi>, A. D. 1439,
(<hi rend='italic'>apud</hi> Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 693):
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... et intueri clare ipsum Deum
trinum et unum, sicuti est, pro meritorum tamen diversitate alium alio
perfectius.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>

<p>
One difficulty still remains, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: By what title do infants
who die in the state of baptismal innocence attain to
eternal beatitude, which they have been unable to merit?
We answer: The just man has two distinct claims to
Heaven, one as a child of God,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref> sqq.</note> and another as a
laborer in His vineyard. Baptized infants who have
not yet arrived at the use of reason, possess only the first
claim, while adult Christians who lead a good life enjoy
also the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>titulus
mercedis</foreign> and consequently are entitled to
a richer reward. Both claims ultimately rest on the merits
of Jesus Christ.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess. XIV, cap.
8: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ita non habet homo, unde glorietur,
sed omnis gloriatio nostra
in Christo est, in quo vivimus, in
quo movemur, in quo satisfacimus
facientes fructus dignos poenitentiae,
qui ex illo vim habent, ab illo offeruntur
Patri et per illum acceptantur
a Patre.</foreign></q> (Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
904.)</note>
</p>

<p>
β) What we have said is sufficient to disprove the
groundless assertion that the Catholic doctrine concerning
the meritoriousness of good works derogates from
the merits of Christ and fosters <q>self-righteousness.</q>
Would it not be far more derogatory to the honor of our
Saviour to assume that He failed to obtain for those for
whom He suffered and died, a limited capacity for gaining
merits? Does it in any way impair the dignity of God
as the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causa prima</foreign>
to assume that He communicates to
His creatures a limited causality, by which they are enabled
to act as true <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causae
secundae</foreign>, instead of being
mere <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>causae occasionales</foreign>,
as the Occasionalists assert?<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI,
can. 33: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis dixerit, per hanc
doctrinam catholicam de iustificatione,
a s. Synodo hoc praesenti decreto
expressam, aliquâ ex parte
gloriae Dei vel meritis Iesu Christi
D. N. derogari, et non potius veritatem
fidei nostrae, Dei denique ac
Christi Iesu gloriam illustrari, anathema
sit.</foreign></q></note>
As regards the other charge, no true Catholic is guilty of
<q>self-righteousness</q> because he regards his good works
<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>
as <q>fruits of justification,</q> owing purely to grace. The
<q>self-righteousness</q> of which Luther speaks is incompatible
with the virtue of humility. The faithful Christian,
according to St. Paul, may safely rejoice over his
merits, because the uncertainty of justification and the
consciousness that his good works are but limited at best,
are a sufficient protection against self-righteousness and
presumption.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De Iustificatione</hi>,
V, 7. See also the article
on <q>Merit</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic Encyclopedia</hi>,
Vol. X.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Explanation of the Catholic Doctrine.</hi>&mdash;Though
the Tridentine Council merely defined
in general terms that all good works performed in
the state of sanctifying grace are meritorious,<note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 16:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vere
promeruisse</foreign>;</q> Sess. VI, can. 32:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vere mereri</foreign>.</q></note>
it is theologically certain that the merit due to
good works is the merit of condignity.
</p>

<p>
a) According to Pallavicini<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hist.
Conc. Trident.</hi>, VIII, 4.</note> the Fathers of Trent
without exception were convinced that the merit inherent
in good works is a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum
de condigno</foreign>, based upon divine
justice, and they purposely employed the term
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vere</foreign>
to exclude that quasi-merit which in the technical
terminology of the Schools is called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum
de congruo</foreign>.<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Operibus
post acceptam iustificationem
peractis adeoque divinâ
gratiâ informatis redditisque ob
merita Christi potentioribus, cuius
vivum membrum est is qui ea peragit,
omnes concedebant rationem
meriti condigni ad conservandam
augendamque eandem gratiam aeternaeque
felicitatis consequendam.</foreign></q>
(Pallavicini, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>)</note>
They refrained from expressly employing the
term <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum de
condigno</foreign>, because <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum verum</foreign> is a
plain and adequate term, and for this additional reason
that they wished to avoid certain theological controversies
<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>
regarding the nature of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum
de condigno</foreign> and its
requisites.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. infra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_III_Section_2'>Sect. 2</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) We need not enter into these controversies to
understand that condign merit supposes an equality between
service and reward. The proposition can be proved
from Sacred Scripture by an indirect argument. The
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum de
condigno</foreign> is based on a strict claim of justice,
not on mere equity. Now the Bible leaves no doubt that
God meant to make himself a debtor to man in strict justice.
Cfr. Heb. VI, 10: <q>For God is not unjust, that he
should forget your work.</q><note place='foot'>Heb. VI, 10:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non enim iniustus
est Deus, ut obliviscatur operis
vestri.</foreign></q></note> 2 Tim. IV, 8: <q>... there
is laid up for me a crown of justice, which the Lord the
just judge will render to me in that day: and not only to
me, but to them also that love his coming.</q><note place='foot'>2 Tim. IV, 8:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>... reposita
est mihi</foreign>,</q> etc. See note 24, <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>,
p. <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>.</note> James I, 12:
<q>Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when
he hath been proved, he shall receive the crown of life,
which God hath promised to them that love him.</q><note place='foot'>Iac. I, 12:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Beatus vir, qui
suffert tentationem</foreign>,</q> etc. <hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
note 27, p. <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>.</note> That
there must be a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>condignitas</foreign>
between service and reward
is clearly apparent from such texts as these:&mdash;Wis. III,
5: <q>... God hath tried them and found them worthy
of himself.</q><note place='foot'>Wisd. III, 5:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus tentavit eos et
invenit illos dignos se.</foreign></q></note> 2 Thess. I, 4 sq.: <q>... in all your
persecutions and tribulations, which you endure, for an example
[as a token] of the just judgment of God, that you
may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which
also you suffer.</q><note place='foot'>2 Thess. I, 4 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In omnibus
persecutionibus vestris et tribulationibus,
quas sustinetis in exemplum
iusti iudicii Dei, ut digni
habeamini in regno Dei, pro quo et
patimini.</foreign></q></note> Apoc. III, 4: <q>... they shall walk
with me in white, because they are worthy.</q><note place='foot'>Apoc. III, 4:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ambulabunt
mecum in albis, quia digni sunt.</foreign></q></note> Not merely
as their benefactor but as the just judge, Christ will say
<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>
to the elect on judgment day: <q>Come, ye blessed of my
Father, possess you the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world. For I was hungry, and you
gave me to eat....</q><note place='foot'>Matth. XXV, 34 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Venite,
benedicti Patris mei, possidete paratum
vobis regnum a constitutione
mundi; esurivi enim et dedistis mihi
manducare....</foreign></q></note> Justly therefore is sanctifying
grace, as the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>principium
dignificativum operum</foreign>, called the
<q>seed of God,</q><note place='foot'>1 John III, 9.</note>
because it contains a celestial reward
even as an acorn contains the oak. True, St. Thomas, to
whom we are indebted for this simile,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 114,
art. 3, ad 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia Spiritus S.,
quam in praesenti habemus, etsi
non sit aequalis gloriae in actu, est
tamen aequalis in virtute, sicut semen
arboris, in quo est virtus ad
totam arborem. Et similiter per
gratiam inhabitat hominem Spiritus
S., qui est sufficiens causa vitae
aeternae, unde et dicitur esse pignus
hæreditatis nostrae.</foreign></q></note> in another part of
the <hi rend='italic'>Summa</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>,
1a, qu. 21, art.
4, ad 1.</note> defends the theological axiom: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus
punit circa condignum et remunerat ultra condignum</foreign>,</q>
but he does not mean to deny the equality between service
and reward, but merely to exalt the generosity that
prompts God to bestow upon creatures what is due to
them more bountifully than they deserve. Cfr. Luke VI,
38: <q>Give, and it shall be given to you: good measure
and pressed down and shaken together and running over
shall they give into your bosom.</q><note place='foot'>Luke VI, 38:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Date, et dabitur
vobis: mensuram bonam, et
confectam, et coagitatam, et supereffluentem
dabunt in sinum vestrum.</foreign></q>
Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Prop. Baii damn. A. D. 1567 a
Pio V</hi>, 14 (Denzinger-Bannwart, n.
1014): <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Opera bona iustorum non
accipient in die iudicii extremi mercedem
ampliorem, quam iusto Dei
iudicio mereantur accipere.</foreign></q> For
further information on this topic
consult Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De Iustificatione</hi>,
V, 19; De Lugo, <hi rend='italic'>De Poenitentia</hi>,
disp. 24, n. 10. The Thomistic
axiom, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Deus punit citra condignum
et remunerat ultra condignum</foreign></q>
and Baius' condemned
proposition are interpreted somewhat
differently than we have explained
them by Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>,
XII, 31, 14. On the general argument
of this Section the student
may profitably consult St. Bonaventure,
<hi rend='italic'>Breviloquium</hi>, P. V, § 12; Billuart,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, diss. 8, art. 3;
Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Instit. Theol.</hi>, Vol. III, pp.
226 sqq., Paris 1896; Chr. Pesch,
<hi rend='italic'>Praelect. Dogmat.</hi>, Vol. V, 3rd ed.,
pp. 218 sqq., Freiburg 1908;
Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 614
sqq., Freiburg 1901.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_III_Section_2'/>
<head>Section 2. The Requisites Of Merit</head>

<p>
As we are dealing with the <q>fruits of justification,</q> it
becomes necessary to ascertain the requisites or conditions
of true merit. There are seven such; four have
reference to the meritorious work itself, two to the agent
who performs it, and one to God who gives the reward.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Requisites of Merit on the Part of the
Meritorious Work.</hi>&mdash;A work, to be meritorious,
must be morally good, free, performed with the
assistance of actual grace, and inspired by a
supernatural motive.
</p>

<p>
a) As every evil deed implies demerit and is
deserving of punishment, so the notion of merit
supposes a morally good work (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>opus honestum</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
Cfr. Eph. VI, 8: <q>Knowing that whatsoever good
thing any man shall do, the same shall he receive from
the Lord.</q><note place='foot'>Eph. VI, 8:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Scientes, quoniam
unusquisque, quodcunque fecerit
bonum, hoc recipiet a Domino.</foreign></q></note>
2 Cor. V, 10: <q>We must all be manifested
before the judgment-seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the proper things of the body, according as he
hath done, whether it be good or evil.</q><note place='foot'>2 Cor. V, 10:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnes enim
nos manifestari oportet ante tribunal
Christi, ut referat unusquisque propria
corporis, prout gessit, sive bonum
sive malum.</foreign></q></note> There are no
morally indifferent works <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in
individuo</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> practically;
and if there were, they could be neither meritorious nor
<pb n='411'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>
demeritorious, but would become meritorious in proportion
as they are made morally good by means of a <q>good
intention.</q> It would be absolutely wrong to ascribe
merit only to the more perfect works of supererogation
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>opera supererogatoria</foreign>),
such as the vow of perpetual
chastity, excluding all works of mere obligation, such as
the faithful observance of the commandments. Being
morally good, the works of obligation are also meritorious,
because goodness and meritoriousness are correlative
terms.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>,
1a 2ae, qu. 114, art. 1, ad 1: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Homo,
in quantum propriâ voluntate
facit illud quod debet, meretur; alioquin
actus iustitiae, quo quis reddit
debitum, non esset meritorius.</foreign></q></note>
Whether the mere omission of an evil act is
in itself meritorious, is doubtful.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Suarez,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, X, 2,
5 sqq.</note> But most theologians
are agreed in holding that the external work, as such,
adds no merit to the internal act, except in so far as it
reacts on the will and sustains and intensifies its operation.
This and similar questions properly belong to
moral theology.
</p>

<p>
b) The second requisite of merit is moral liberty
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>libertas
indifferens ad actum</foreign>), that is to say,
freedom from both external and internal compulsion.
This has been dogmatically defined against
Jansenius.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God the Author
of Nature and the Supernatural</hi>,
pp. 291 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
That there can be no merit without liberty is
clearly inculcated by Sacred Scripture. Cfr. 1
Cor. IX, 17: <q>For if I do this willingly, I have
a reward.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. IX, 17: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si enim
volens hoc ago, mercedem habeo.</foreign></q></note> Matth. XIX, 17: <q>If thou wilt
enter into life, keep the commandments.</q><note place='foot'>Matth. XIX, 17:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si autem
vis ad vitam ingredi, serva mandata.</foreign></q></note>
<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/>
<q>Where there is compulsion,</q> says St. Jerome, <q>there
is neither a crown nor damnation.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra
Jovin.</hi>, 1. II, n. 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ubi
necessitas est, nec corona nec damnatio
est.</foreign></q></note> The
morality of an act depends entirely on its being an
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>actus humanus</foreign>. Now no act is truly <q>human</q>
unless it be freely performed. Consequently,
freedom of choice is an indispensable condition of
moral goodness and therefore also of merit.
</p>

<p>
What kind of liberty is necessary to enable the
will to acquire merit? Theologians answer by
saying that it is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>libertas
contradictionis sive exercitii</foreign>.
If I do a good deed which I am free to do or
not to do, I perform a morally good and therefore
meritorious work. As regards the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>libertas specificationis</foreign>,
(that freedom by which a person may
act thus or otherwise, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> give alms to one
applicant in preference to another, or mortify
himself in this or that particular manner), there
can be no doubt that, whatever the choice made,
the action is always good and meritorious. However,
theologians have excogitated a hypothetical
case in which an action may be <emph>physically</emph> free
without being meritorious. It is when one is
compelled to do a certain thing and is free only
in so far as he is able to choose between two actions
exactly equal in moral worth. This would
be the case, for instance, if he had to pay a debt
of ten dollars and were left free to pay it either in
<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>
coin or in currency. The more common opinion
is that in a case of this kind there would be a lack
of that liberty which is necessary to render an act
morally good and therefore meritorious.<note place='foot'>For a more extensive treatment
of this and allied questions
consult Ripalda, <hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernaturali</hi>,
disp. 74, sect. 3; De Lugo,
<hi rend='italic'>De Incarnatione</hi>, disp. 26, sect. 10,
n. 126 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
c) The third requisite of merit is actual grace.
Its necessity is evident from the fact that, to be
meritorious, an act must be supernatural and consequently
cannot be performed without the aid of
prevenient and coöperating grace.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
d) Merit further requires a supernatural motive,
for the reason that every good work must be
supernatural, both as regards object and circumstances
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex obiecto et circumstantiis</foreign>), and
the end for which it is performed
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex fine</foreign>). In
determining the necessary qualities of this motive,
however, theologians differ widely.
</p>

<p>
α) A considerable number, mostly of the Thomist persuasion,
demand the motive of theological charity, and
consequently regard the state of charity
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>caritas habitualis
sive status caritatis et gratiae</foreign>) as essential for the
meritoriousness of all good works performed in the state
of grace, even if they are performed from some other,
truly supernatural though inferior motive, such as
obedience, the fear of God, etc. This rigorous school
is constrained to raise the question whether every single
good work, to be supernaturally meritorious, must
proceed from an act of divine charity
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>toties quoties</foreign>), or
<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>
whether the virtual influence of one act is sufficient to endow
a series of subsequent acts with meritoriousness.
Only a few Thomist theologians<note place='foot'>Especially Bañez
(<hi rend='italic'>Comment. in
S. Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 24, art. 6,
dub. 6). This view is also taken by
the so-called Augustinians.</note> defend the first-mentioned
theory. The majority<note place='foot'>Notably Billuart; see his treatise
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, diss. 8, art. 4.</note>
hold that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>influxus
virtualis caritatis</foreign> is sufficient. This view is vigorously
defended by Cardinal Bellarmine, who says: <q>It is not
enough to make a general good intention at the beginning
of a year, or month, or day, by which all future actions
are referred to God; but it is necessary to refer each
particular act to God before it is performed.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Iustificatione</hi>, V, 15:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non sufficere, si quis ad initium
anni vel mensis vel etiam diei generali
quadam intentione referat
omnia sua futura opera in Deum,
sed necesse esse ut illud ipsum opus
particulare referatur in Deum, quod
postea faciendum est.</foreign></q></note> The
advocates of this theory base their opinion on certain
Scriptural and Patristic texts, and especially on St.
Thomas, whose teaching they misunderstand.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theologica</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu.
114, art. 4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et ideo meritum
vitae aeternae primo pertinet ad
caritatem, ad alias autem virtutes
secundario, secundum quod earum
actus a caritate imperantur.</foreign></q> And
again, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>, ad 3:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Similiter etiam
actus patientiae et fortitudinis non
est meritorius, nisi aliquis ex caritate
haec operetur.</foreign></q> On the true
sense of these passages cfr. Schiffini,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 647 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
The dogmatic question whether good works can be
meritorious without being inspired by supernatural charity,
has nothing to do with the moral problem whether
there is an obligation to make an act of charity from time
to time, except in so far as habitual charity,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the
state of charity, which is always required for merit, nay
even for the preservation of sanctifying grace,&mdash;cannot
be permanently sustained unless renewed from time to
time and effectuated by a fresh act of that virtue.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>Prop. damn. ab Innocentio
XI</hi>, prop. 6 (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1156): <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Probabile est, ne singulis
quidem rigorose quinquenniis
per se obligare praeceptum caritatis
erga Deum.</foreign></q></note> St.
<pb n='415'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>
Alphonsus teaches that every man is obliged to make an
act of charity at least once a month, but he is contradicted
by other eminent moralists. In practice it is well
to insist on frequent acts of charity because such acts not
only confirm and preserve the state of grace, but render
our good works incomparably more meritorious in the
sight of God. Hence, too, the importance of making a
<q>good intention</q> every morning before beginning the
day's work.<note place='foot'>Cfr. J. Ernst, <hi rend='italic'>Die Notwendigkeit
der guten Meinung. Untersuchungen
über die Gottesliebe als Prinzip der
Sittlichkeit und Verdienstlichkeit</hi>,
Freiburg 1905.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) There is a second group of very eminent theologians,
including Suarez,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, IX, 3.</note>
Vasquez,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S. Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae,
disp. 220.</note> De Lugo, and Ballerini,
who hold that, to be meritorious, the good works of
a just man, who has habitual charity, need only conform
to the divine law, no special motive being required.
These writers base their teaching on the Tridentine
decree which says: <q>For this is that crown
of justice which the Apostle declared was, after his
fight and course, laid up for him, to be rendered to
him by the Just Judge, and not only to him, but also to
all that love His coming. For, whereas Jesus Christ
Himself continually infuses His virtue into the said
justified,&mdash;as the head into the members and the vine
into the branches,&mdash;and this virtue always precedes, and
accompanies, and follows their good works, which without
it could not in any wise be pleasing and meritorious
before God (can. 2), we must believe that nothing further
is wanting to the justified to prevent their being accounted
to have, by those very works which have been done in
God, fully satisfied the divine law according to the
state of this life, and to have truly merited eternal life,
<pb n='416'/><anchor id='Pg416'/>
to be obtained also in its [due] time, if so be, however,
that they depart in grace.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Concilium
Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI,
cap. 16: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Haec est enim illa
corona iustitiae, quam post suum
certamen et cursum repositam sibi
esse aiebat Apostolus a iusto iudice
sibi reddendam, non solum autem
sibi, sed et omnibus qui diligunt
adventum eius. Quum enim ille ipse
Christus Iesus tamquam caput in
membra et tamquam vitis in palmites
in ipsos iustificatos iugiter virtutem
influat, quae virtus bona eorum
opera semper antecedit et comitatur
et subsequitur et sine quâ nullo
pacto Deo grata et meritoria esse
possent, nihil ipsis iustificatis amplius
deesse credendum est, quominus
plene illis quidem operibus, quae in
Deo</foreign> [=<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per Deum</foreign>; v. Sess. VI, can.
26, 32] <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sunt facta, divinae legi pro
huius vitae statu satisfecisse et vitam
aeternam suo etiam tempore, si
tamen in gratia decesserint, consequendam
vere promeruisse censeantur.</foreign></q>
(Denzinger-Bannwart, n. 809.)</note> This teaching is in harmony
with Scripture. The Bible nowhere requires an act of
charity to make good works meritorious for Heaven. In
the <q>eight beatitudes</q><note place='foot'>Cfr. Matth. V, 2
sqq.</note> our Lord Himself promises
eternal glory for works which are not all works of charity,
nor even dictated by charity, either formal or virtual.
When He was asked: <q>Master, what good shall I do
that I may have life everlasting?</q><note place='foot'>Matth. XIX, 16:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quid boni
faciam, ut habeam vitam aeternam?</foreign></q></note> he did not answer
with Bellarmine: <q>Steep all thy works in the motive of
charity,</q> but declared: <q>If thou wilt enter into life, keep
the commandments.</q><note place='foot'>Matth. XIX, 17:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si autem
vis ad vitam ingredi, serva mandata.</foreign></q></note> And when requested to specify,
He simply cited the ordinary precepts of the Decalogue.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Matth. XIX, 18 sqq.</note>
We also know that at the Last Judgment He
will receive the elect into the <q>kingdom of His Father</q>
solely in consideration of the works of mercy they have
done.<note place='foot'>The Scriptural argument is
more fully developed by Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Inst.
Theol.</hi>, Vol. III, pp. 233 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
Theological reasoning lends its support to this view. If
good works performed without the motive of charity
were not supernaturally meritorious, this would be attributable
to one of three causes. Either the just would
<pb n='417'/><anchor id='Pg417'/>
sin by doing good; or good works performed without
charity would not be deserving of eternal beatitude; or,
finally, there would be no strict equality between service
and reward. All three of these suppositions are untenable.
The first would lead to Bajanism or Jansenism.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V.
supra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> sqq.</note>
The second and third overlook the fact that the
requisite proportion (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>condignitas</foreign>)
between service and
reward is furnished by sanctifying grace or habitual charity,
which, as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>deificatio</foreign>,
adoptive sonship, and union with
the Holy Ghost, actually supplies that for which the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>motivum caritatis</foreign> is demanded.
</p>

<p>
We might ask the advocates of the more rigorous opinion,
whence the act of charity which they demand for
every meritorious work, derives its peculiar proportionality
or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>condignitas</foreign>
with the beatific vision. Surely not
from itself, because as an act it is merely <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primus inter
pares</foreign>, without in any essential respect excelling other
motives. There is no alternative but to attribute it to
that quasi-divine dignity which is imparted to the just
man and his works by sanctifying grace.
</p>

<p>
For these reasons present-day theology regards the
second theory as sufficiently well established and the faithful
are largely guided by it in practice.<note place='foot'>On a similar controversy regarding
the necessity of the motive
of faith, see Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelect. Dogmat.</hi>,
Vol. III, 3rd ed., pp. 225 sqq.,
and Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp.
649 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_III_Section_2_No_2'/>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Requisites of Merit on the Part of the
Agent who Merits.</hi>&mdash;The agent who merits
must be a wayfarer and in the state of sanctifying
grace.
</p>

<p>
a) The wayfaring state (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>status viae</foreign>) is merely
another name for life on earth. Death as the
<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>
natural, though not essentially necessary limit
of life, closes the time of meriting. Nothing is
more clearly taught in Holy Scripture than that
we must sow in this world if we desire to reap in
the next.<note place='foot'>The Scriptural proof for this
proposition will be found in the
dogmatic treatise on Eschatology.
On the absurdity of the semi-Pelagian
hypothesis of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>merita sub conditione
futura</foreign> see Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God:
His Knowability, Essence, and
Attributes</hi>, pp. 375 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) The second requisite is the state of sanctifying
grace. Only the just can be <q>sons of God</q>
and <q>heirs of heaven.</q><note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>Prop. Baii damn. 1567 a
Pio V</hi>, prop. 17 (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 1017): <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sentiunt cum
Pelagio, qui dicunt esse necessarium
ad rationem meriti, ut homo per
gratiam adoptionis sublimetur ad
statum deificum.</foreign></q></note> Cfr. John XV, 4:
<q>As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, unless
it abide in the vine, so neither can you, unless you
abide in me.</q><note place='foot'>John XV, 4:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sicut palmes
non potest ferre fructum a semetipso,
nisi manserit in vite, sic nec
vos, nisi in me manseritis.</foreign></q></note> Rom. VIII, 17: <q>And if sons,
heirs also; heirs indeed of God, and joint heirs
with Christ.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. VIII, 17:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si autem
filii, et haeredes; haeredes quidem
Dei, cohaeredes autem Christi.</foreign></q>
Additional Biblical texts in Bellarmine,
<hi rend='italic'>De Iustificatione</hi>, V, 12 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
Does the degree of sanctifying grace existing in the
soul exert a decisive influence on the amount of merit
due to the good works performed? This question can
be easily solved on the theological principle that the supernatural
dignity of the soul increases in proportion to its
growth in sanctifying grace. Vasquez holds that, other
things being equal, one who is holier gains no greater
merit by performing a given work than one who is less
<pb n='419'/><anchor id='Pg419'/>
holy.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S. Theol.</hi>, 3a,
disp. 6, cap. 4.</note> All other theologians<note place='foot'>Suarez
(<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, XII, 22),
Ripalda (<hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernaturali</hi>,
disp. 81), De Lugo (<hi rend='italic'>De Incarnatione</hi>, disp. 6, sect. 2,
n. 37).</note> hold with St. Thomas<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment. in
Sent.</hi>, II, dist. 29,
qu. 1, art. 4.</note>
that the meritoriousness of a good deed is larger in proportion
to the godlike dignity of the agent, which in turn
is measured by the degree of sanctifying grace in the soul.
This explains why God, in consideration of the greater
holiness of some saints who are especially dear to Him,
often deigns through their intercession to grant favors
which He refuses to others.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Job XLII, 8; Dan. III, 35.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Requisites of Merit on the Part of
God.</hi>&mdash;Merit requires but one thing on the part
of God, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: that He
accept the good work <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in actu
secundo</foreign> as deserving of reward. Since, however,
theologians are not agreed on this point, we are
dealing merely with a more or less well-founded
opinion.
</p>

<p>
Though the good works of the just derive a special
intrinsic value from the godlike dignity of adoptive sonship,
and, consequently, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in
actu primo</foreign>, are truly meritorious
prior to and apart from their acceptance by God,
yet human service and divine remuneration are
separated by such a wide gulf that, in order to make a
good deed meritorious <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in
actu secundo</foreign>, the divine acceptance
and promise of reward must be expressly superadded.
</p>

<p>
In regard to the relation between service and reward
Catholic theologians are divided into three schools.
</p>

<p>
The Scotists<note place='foot'>Cfr. Scotus, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in Sent.</hi>,
I, dist. 17, qu. 2.</note> hold that the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>condignitas</foreign> of a good work
<pb n='420'/><anchor id='Pg420'/>
rests entirely on God's gratuitous promise and free acceptance,
without which even the most heroic act would
be utterly devoid of merit, whereas with it even naturally
good works may become meritorious. This rather
shallow theory almost completely loses sight of the godlike
dignity peculiar to the just in their capacity of
<q>adopted children of God</q> and <q>temples of the Holy
Ghost,</q> and is unable to account for such important Biblical
terms as <q>crown of justice,</q> <q>prize of victory,</q>
<q>just judge,</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
Suarez and his school contend that there is such a
perfectly balanced equality between merit and reward
that God is obliged in strict justice
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex obligatione iustitiae</foreign>),
prior to and apart from any formal act of acceptance
or promise on His part, to reward good works by the
beatific vision. This view is scarcely tenable because
there is no common basis on which to construe a relation
of strict justice between the Creator and His creatures,<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Pohle-Preuss, <hi rend='italic'>God: His
Knowability, Essence, and Attributes</hi>,
PP. 456 sq.</note>
and moreover St. Paul expressly teaches that <q>The sufferings
of this time are not worthy to be compared with
the glory to come.</q><note place='foot'>Rom. VIII, 18:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non sunt
condignae passiones huius temporis
ad futuram gloriam.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
Hence we prefer to hold with Lessius,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Perfect.
Divin.</hi>, XIII, 2.</note> Vasquez,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment.
in S. Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, disp. 214, 223.</note> and
De Lugo<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Incarnatione</hi>, disp. 3, sect.
1 sq.</note> that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>condignitas</foreign>
or equality existing between
merit and reward, owes its origin both to the intrinsic
value of the good work itself and to the free acceptance
and gratuitous promise of God. This solution
duly respects the intrinsic value of merit
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in actu primo</foreign>,
without derogating from the sublime dignity of God, who
rewards good works not because He is obliged to do so
<pb n='421'/><anchor id='Pg421'/>
by the merits of a mere creature, but solely because He
is bound by His own truthfulness and fidelity. Thus
God's justice towards His creatures is placed upon a free
basis, and there is no violation of justice
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>iniuria</foreign>) on His
part. <q>From the fact that our actions have no merit
except on the supposition that God so ordained,</q> says
St. Thomas, <q>it does not follow that God is simply our
debtor; He is His own debtor, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> He owes it to Himself
to see that His commands are obeyed.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 114,
art. 1, ad 3: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dicendum quod,
quia actio nostra non habet rationem
meriti nisi ex praesuppositione divinae
ordinationis, non sequitur
quod Deus efficiatur simpliciter debitor
nobis, sed sibi ipsi, inquantum
debitum est, ut sua ordinatio impleatur.</foreign></q></note> This
teaching can be proved from Sacred Scripture. Cfr.
James I, 12: <q>He shall receive the crown of life, which
God hath promised to them that love him.</q><note place='foot'>Iac. I, 12:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Accipiet coronam
vitae</foreign> [St. Paul says: ὁ τῆς δικαιοσύνης
στέφανος], <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quam repromisit
(ἐπηγγείλατο) Deus diligentibus
se.</foreign></q></note> It is reechoed
by St. Augustine: <q>God is made our debtor, not
by receiving anything from us, but because it pleased Him
to promise us something. For it is in a different sense
that we say to a man: You are indebted to me because
I have given you something, and: You owe this to
me because you have promised it. To God we never say:
Give back to me because I have given to Thee. What
have we given to God, since it is from Him that we have
received whatever we are and whatever good we possess?
We have therefore given Him nothing.... In this manner,
therefore, may we demand of God, by saying: Give
me what Thou hast promised, because we have done what
Thou didst command, and it is Thyself that hast done it
because Thou hast aided our labors.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Serm.</hi>,
158, c. 2, n. 2: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Debitor
factus est Deus non aliquid a
nobis accipiendo, sed quod ei placuit
promittendo. Aliter enim dicimus
homini: Debes mihi, quia dedi tibi;
et aliter dicimus: Debes mihi, quia
promisisti mihi. Deo autem nunquam
dicimus: Redde mihi, quia
dedi tibi. Quid dedimus Deo, quando
totum quod sumus et quod habemus
boni, ab illo habemus? Nihil
ergo ei dedimus.... Illo ergo modo
possumus exigere Dominum nostrum
ut dicamus: Redde, quod promisisti,
quia fecimus quod iussisti, et hoc tu
fecisti, quia laborantes iuvisti.</foreign></q></note> The Tridentine
<pb n='422'/><anchor id='Pg422'/>
Council seems to endorse this view when it says:
<q>Life eternal is to be proposed to those ... hoping in
God ... as a reward which is, according to the promise
of God Himself, to be faithfully rendered to their good
works and merits.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Conc.
Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI, cap.
16: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In Deo sperantibus proponenda
est vita aeterna ... tamquam
merces ex ipsius Dei promissione
bonis ipsorum operibus et meritis
fideliter [i.e. ex fidelitate] reddenda.</foreign></q>
Cfr. Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia
Divina</hi>, pp. 416 sqq.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='423'/><anchor id='Pg423'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_III_Section_3'/>
<head>Section 3. The Objects Of Merit</head>

<p>
After defining the existence of merit the Tridentine
Council enumerates its objects as follows:
<q>If anyone saith that the justified, by the
good works which he performs, ... does not
truly merit increase of grace, eternal life, and the
attainment of that eternal life,&mdash;if it be so, however,
that he depart in grace,&mdash;and also an increase
of glory: let him be anathema.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 32:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Si quis
dixerit, iustificatum bonis operibus ...
non vere mereri augmentum gratiae,
vitam aeternam et ipsius vitae
aeternae, si tamen in gratia decesserit,
consecutionem atque etiam
gloriae augmentum, anathema sit.</foreign></q></note> Hence
merit calls for a threefold reward: (1) an increase
of sanctifying grace; (2) heavenly glory;
and (3) an increase of that glory. The expression
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vere mereri</foreign></q>
shows that all three of these
objects can be merited in the true and strict sense
of the term (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de
condigno</foreign>). This is, however, no
more than a theologically certain conclusion.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Increase of Sanctifying Grace.</hi>&mdash;The
first grace of justification (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia prima</foreign>) can
never be merited;<note place='foot'>See the article on <q>Merit</q> in
the <hi rend='italic'>Catholic Encyclopedia</hi>.</note> hence the meaning of the
above-quoted conciliar definition is that it can be
increased by good works. This increase is technically
<pb n='424'/><anchor id='Pg424'/>
called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia secunda</foreign>. All Scriptural
texts which assert that sanctifying grace is unequal
in different individuals, also prove that it
can be increased or augmented by the performance
of meritorious works.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_3_Thesis_II'>Ch. II, Sect. 3,
Thesis II</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
a) No adult person can merit the first grace of assistance
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia prima
actualis</foreign>), nor any one of the series
of actual graces which follow it, and by which justification
ultimately comes to pass. They are all purely gratuitous.
Similarly, too, the first grace of justification (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
prima habitualis</foreign>) cannot be strictly merited by the sinner
preparing for justification. This is the express teaching
of Trent: <q>But we are therefore said to be justified
freely, because that none of those things which precede
justification&mdash;whether faith or works&mdash;merit the grace
itself of justification; for, if it be a grace, it is not now
by works; otherwise, as the same Apostle says, grace
is no more grace.</q><note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 8:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratis
autem iustificari ideo dicimur, quia
nihil eorum quae iustificationem
praecedunt, sive fides, sive opera,
ipsam iustificationis gratiam promeretur;
si enim gratia est, iam non
ex operibus, alioquin, ut idem Apostolus
inquit, gratia iam non est gratia.</foreign></q></note> To deny this would not only
imperil the dogma of the gratuity of grace (because if
the first grace given before active justification could be
strictly merited, this would necessarily involve
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
prima actualis</foreign>), but it would also start a vicious circle
(because the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
prima habitualis</foreign> is an indispensable
condition of merit). This explains why St. Paul and St.
Augustine again and again insist on the gratuity both of
the first grace of assistance and the grace of justification
proper.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_III_Section_2_No_2'>Sect. 2, No. 2</ref>.</note>
<q>This grace of Christ,</q> says St. Augustine,
<q>without which neither infants nor adults can be saved,
<pb n='425'/><anchor id='Pg425'/>
is not bestowed for any merits, but is given freely, on
account of which it is also called grace. <q>Being justified,</q> says the Apostle,
<q>freely through His blood.</q></q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Natura et Gratia</hi>, c. 4, n.
4: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Haec Christi gratia, sine quâ
nec infantes nec aetate grandes salvi
fieri possunt, non meritis redditur,
sed gratis datur, propter quod et
gratia nominatur. Iustificati, inquit
(Rom. III, 24; V, 4), gratis per
sanguinem ipsius.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<p>
In the light of this teaching it is easy to decide the
question, raised by Vasquez, whether perfect contrition
justifies the sinner merely <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per
modum dispositionis</foreign> or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per
modum causae formalis</foreign>. Both contrition and charity, be
they perfect or imperfect, are essentially acts that dispose
the soul for justification.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
<hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>, Sess. VI,
cap. 6; Sess. VI, cap. 3; Sess. XIV,
cap. 4; <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>
sqq.</note> Hence, no matter how perfect,
neither is capable of effecting justification itself by way of
merit (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>merendo</foreign>),
nay, of entering even partially, as
Vasquez would have it, into the formal cause of justification,
because, according to the Tridentine Council, sanctifying
grace and not perfect contrition is the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>unica causa
formalis</foreign> of justification.<note place='foot'>For a more exhaustive treatment
of this topic consult Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Instit.
Theol.</hi>, Vol. III, pp. 158 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) In connection with the dogma just explained theologians
discuss the question whether a just man may
strictly (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de
condigno</foreign>) merit the actual graces which
God bestows on him. We must carefully distinguish
between merely sufficient and efficacious graces. Theologians
commonly hold<note place='foot'>See, for example, Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia</hi>, XII, 26: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De auxiliis sufficientibus
et necessariis, quae post
aliquod meritum de condigno augmenti
gratiae dantur, vel offeruntur,
probabile est concomitanter cadere
sub idem meritum de condigno augmenti
gratiae; nam qui meretur de
condigno aliquam formam, meretur
quidquid connaturaliter sequitur ex
tali forma vel ei connaturaliter debetur.</foreign></q>
On the actual distribution
of sufficient grace, v. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>
sqq.</note> that merely sufficient graces
may be merited <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de
condigno</foreign>, not so efficacious graces,
because the right to efficacious graces would necessarily
include a strict right to final perseverance
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>donum perseverantiae</foreign>),
<pb n='426'/><anchor id='Pg426'/>
which lies outside the sphere of condign
merit. Assuming that the justified could by good works
strictly merit the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>prima
gratia efficax</foreign> (an impossible hypothesis,
because merit presupposes efficacious grace),
this would involve a similar claim to a second, third,
fourth grace&mdash;and ultimately to the final grace of perseverance,
which, in matter of fact, no man can merit. Not
even heroic acts of virtue give a strict right to infallibly
efficacious graces, or to final perseverance. Even the
greatest saint is obliged to watch, pray, and tremble, lest
he lapse from righteousness.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> sqq.</note> For this reason the Tridentine
Council mentions neither final perseverance nor
efficacious graces among the objects of merit.<note place='foot'>For
a fuller treatment cfr.
Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Inst. Theol.</hi>, Vol. III, pp. 258
sqq., and Chr. Pesch, <hi rend='italic'>Praelect. Dogmat.</hi>,
Vol. V, 3rd ed., pp. 237 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Eternal Life or Heavenly Glory.</hi>&mdash;The
second object of merit is eternal life. The
dogmatic proof for this assertion has been given
above.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_III_Section_1'>Sect. 1</ref>.</note>
Eternal life is described by the Tridentine
Council<note place='foot'>Sess. VI, cap. 16; v. <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, pp.
<ref target='Pg400'>400</ref> sq.</note> both as a grace and as a reward.
</p>

<p>
a) In the canon quoted in the introduction of this Section
the same Council<note place='foot'>Sess. VI, can. 32.</note>
enumerates four apparently separate
and distinct objects of merit, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi>: increase of
grace, eternal life, the attainment of eternal life, and increase
of glory. Why the distinction between <q>eternal
life</q> and the <q>attainment of eternal life</q>? Does this
imply a twofold reward, and consequently a twofold
object of merit? Theologians deny that such was the
intention of the Council, because the right to a reward
evidently coincides with the right to the payment of the
<pb n='427'/><anchor id='Pg427'/>
same. An unattainable eternal life would be a
chimera.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, XII,
29: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dicendum vitam aeternam et
vitae aeternae consecutionem non
esse duo praemia distincta, quia
mereri mercedem et solutionem mercedis
non sunt duae mercedes.</foreign></q></note>
Nevertheless, the distinction is not superfluous,
since the attainment of eternal life does not coincide
with the gaining of merit but must be put off until
death, and even then depends upon the condition of the
soul: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>si
tamen in gratia decesserit</foreign></q> (provided he depart
in grace). With this last condition the holy Synod also
wished to inculcate the salutary truth that the loss of
sanctifying grace <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ipso
facto</foreign> entails the forfeiture of all
previously acquired merits. Even the greatest saint, were
he to die in the state of mortal sin, would enter eternity
with empty hands and as an enemy of God. All his
former merits would be cancelled. To revive them would
require a new justification.<note place='foot'>On the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>reviviscentia meritorum</foreign>
see the treatise on the Sacrament
of Penance, Vol. X of this series;
cfr. also Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>,
pp. 661 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
b) A close analysis of the Tridentine canon under review
gives rise to another difficulty. Can the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gloria prima</foreign>
be merited? In defining the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
secunda</foreign> as an object
of strict merit, the Council expressly excludes the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia prima</foreign>.
It makes no such distinction in regard to
glory, but names both <q>eternal life</q>
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gloria prima</foreign>) and
<q>increase of glory</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gloria
secunda</foreign>) as objects of merit.
This naturally suggests the query: Why and to what
extent can the just man merit the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gloria prima</foreign>, seeing that
he is unable to merit the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
prima</foreign>? Some theologians<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>
Ripalda (<hi rend='italic'>De Ente Supernat.</hi>,
disp. 89, sect. 1) and De Lugo
(<hi rend='italic'>De Incarnatione</hi>, disp. 3, n. 59).</note>
contend that the justified are entitled to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gloria
prima</foreign> only as a heritage
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>titulo haereditatis</foreign>), never as
a reward (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>titulo mercedis</foreign>).
Because of its intimate causal connection with the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia prima</foreign>, which is beyond
<pb n='428'/><anchor id='Pg428'/>
the reach of merit, the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gloria prima</foreign>, they argue, cannot be
regarded as an object of merit except on the assumption
that the merits which precede justification confer a claim
to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gloria
prima</foreign>. This assumption is false, because
without sanctifying grace no condign merits can be
acquired.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_III_Section_2_No_2'>Sect. 2, No. 2</ref>.</note>
In spite of this difficulty, however, most theologians<note place='foot'>Cfr.
Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, XII,
28, and Vasquez, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in S.
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, disp. 219, c. 2.</note>
hold that, unlike the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
prima</foreign>, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gloria
prima</foreign> may under certain conditions be an object of strict
merit. The main reason is that, as the state of glory is
not a necessary requisite of the meritoriousness of good
works, while the state of grace is, the former
may <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>positis
ponendis</foreign> be an effect of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum de congruo</foreign>, though
the latter may not. A mere statement of the problem
shows that it cannot be satisfactorily solved unless we distinguish
between and enter into a detailed examination of
two distinct hypotheses. It is generally agreed that infants
dying in the state of baptismal grace owe that grace,
and the state of glory which they enjoy in Heaven,
solely to God's mercy and have no claim to beatitude
other than that of heredity
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>titulus hereditatis</foreign>). Adults
who preserve their baptismal innocence until death,
manifestly cannot merit the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gloria prima</foreign> by their good
works, because they already possess a legal title to it
through Baptism.<note place='foot'>Despite Bellarmine's contradiction
(<hi rend='italic'>De Iustificatione</hi>, V, 20.)</note> It follows that their good works
increase, but do not merit, the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gloria prima</foreign>, to which these
souls are already entitled
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>titulo haereditatis</foreign>. The case is
quite different with catechumens and Christians guilty of
mortal sin, who are justified by an act of perfect contrition
before the reception of Baptism or the Sacrament of Penance.
Of them it may be said, without fear of contradiction,
that they merit for themselves <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de condigno</foreign>, not
<pb n='429'/><anchor id='Pg429'/>
indeed the first grace of justification, but the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gloria
prima</foreign>, because perfect contrition, being
an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>opus operans</foreign>,
at the very moment of its infusion becomes an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>opus
meritorium</foreign> entitled to eternal glory.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>,
1a 2ae, qu. 122, art. 2, ad 1:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Praeparatio hominis ad gratiam
habendam quaedam est simul cum
ipsa infusione gratiae; et talis operatio
est quidem meritoria, sed non
gratiae quae iam habetur, sed gloriae
quae nondum habetur.</foreign></q></note> As regards the
great majority of adult Catholics who, because of defective
preparation, never get beyond imperfect contrition
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>attritio</foreign>),
and therefore are not justified until they actually
receive the Sacrament, it is certain that they owe
whatever grace they possess and whatever glory they have
a claim to, entirely to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>opus
operatum</foreign> of the Sacrament.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Tepe,
<hi rend='italic'>Instit. Theol.</hi>, Vol.
III, pp. 266 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Increase of Heavenly Glory.</hi>&mdash;The third
object of merit, according to the Tridentine Council,
is <q>increase of glory.</q> This must evidently
correspond to an increase of grace, which in its
turn is conditioned upon the performance of additional
good works. That there is a causal connection
between meritorious works performed
on earth and the glory enjoyed in Heaven is
clearly taught by Holy Scripture. Cfr. Matth.
XVI, 27: <q>For the Son of man shall ... render
to every man according to his works.</q><note place='foot'>Matth. XVI, 27:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et tunc
reddet unicuique secundum opera
eius</foreign> (κατὰ τὴν πρᾶξιν αὐτοῦ).</q></note> 1 Cor.
III, 8: <q>And every man shall receive his
own reward, according to his own labor.</q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. III, 8:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unusquisque
autem propriam mercedem (τὸν
ἴδιον μισθόν) accipiet secundum
suum laborem</foreign> (κατὰ τὸν ἴδιον
κόπον).</q></note> A
<pb n='430'/><anchor id='Pg430'/>
further argument may be derived from the unequal
apportionment of glory to the elect in
Heaven.<note place='foot'>See Eschatology.</note> This inequality is based on inequality
of grace, which in turn is owing to the fact
that grace can be augmented by good works.
Consequently, the inequality of glory depends ultimately
on good works.<note place='foot'>Cfr. St. Thomas Aquinas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 114, art. 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Part_II_Chapter_II_Section_2_Article_3_No_4'/>
4. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Note on the Meritum de Congruo.</hi>&mdash;Congruous,
as distinguished from condign
merit, gives no real claim to a reward, but only a
quasi-claim based on equity
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex quadam aequitate</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>congruentia</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>decentia</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
Hence congruous merit and condign merit are not
species of the same genus, but merely analogous terms.
Because of the ambiguity of the word <q>equity</q> Dominicus
Soto, Becanus, and a few other Scholastics rejected
the use of the term <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum
de congruo</foreign> in theology. But
this was a mistake. The Fathers engaged in the Semipelagian
controversy, notably St. Augustine,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De
Praed. Sanctorum</hi>, c. 2.</note> did not
assert that the justifying faith of the sinner is entirely
without merit. The requisites of congruous merit are
identical with those of condign merit<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
<ref target='Part_II_Chapter_III_Section_2'>Sect. 2</ref>.</note>
in all respects except
one,&mdash;the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum
de congruo</foreign> does not require the
state of grace.
</p>

<p>
a) According to the common opinion, from
which but few theologians dissent,<note place='foot'>Prominent among the dissenters
is Billuart (<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, diss. 8,
art. 5).</note> a Christian
in the state of mortal sin can, from the moment he
<pb n='431'/><anchor id='Pg431'/>
begins to coöperate with supernatural grace,
merit <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de congruo</foreign> by good works, and obtain by
prayer the dispositions necessary for justification,
and ultimately justification itself.
</p>

<p>
<q>Prayer relies on mercy,</q> says St. Thomas, <q>condign
merit on justice. And therefore man obtains from the
divine mercy many things by prayer which he does not
merit in strict justice.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>,
1a 2ae, qu. 114,
art. 6, ad 2: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Impetratio orationis
innititur misericordiae, meritum autem
condigni innititur iustitiae. Et
ideo multa orando impetrat homo ex
divina misericordia, quae tamen non
meretur secundum iustitiam.</foreign></q></note> This teaching is based partly on
Holy Scripture and partly on the writings of St. Augustine,
and is confirmed by certain utterances of the
Council of Trent. By conscientiously preparing himself
with the aid of actual grace, the sinner probably merits
an additional claim (in equity) to justification. Cfr. Ps.
L, 19: <q>A sacrifice to God is an afflicted spirit: a contrite
and humbled heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.</q><note place='foot'>Ps. L, 19:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cor contritum et
humiliatum Deus non despicies.</foreign></q></note>
Dan. IV, 24: <q>Redeem thou thy sins with alms, and
thy iniquities with works of mercy to the poor: perhaps
he [God] will forgive thy offences.</q><note place='foot'>Dan. IV, 24:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Peccata tua
eleemosynis redime et iniquitates
tuas misericordiis pauperum; forsitan
ignoscet delictis tuis.</foreign></q></note> St. Augustine
says: <q>The remission of sins itself is not without some
merit, if faith asks for it. Nor is that faith entirely
unmeritorious by which the publican was moved to say:
<q>God, be merciful to me, a sinner,</q> and then went away justified through the
merit of faithful humility.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep. ad Sixt.</hi>,
194, c. 3, n. 9:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sed nec ipsa remissio peccatorum
sine aliquo merito est, si fides hanc
impetret. Neque enim nullum est
meritum fidei, quâ fide ille dicebat:
Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori, et
descendit iustificatus merito fidelis
humilitatis.</foreign></q> Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Conc. Trident.</hi>,
Sess. VI, cap. 7 (Denzinger-Bannwart,
n. 799): <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hanc dispositionem
seu praeparationem iustificatio ipsa
consequitur.</foreign></q> For a fuller treatment
cfr. Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, XII, 37.</note>
</p>

<pb n='432'/><anchor id='Pg432'/>

<p>
b) By good works the just may merit for themselves,
not in strict justice (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de condigno</foreign>), but as
a matter of equity (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de
congruo</foreign>), final perseverance,
conversion from mortal sin, spiritual favors
for others, and also such temporal blessings as
may be conducive to eternal salvation.
</p>

<p>
α) It is a theologically certain conclusion, accepted by
all theologians without exception, that the grace of final
perseverance (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>donum
perseverantiae</foreign>) cannot be merited
in the strict sense (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de
condigno</foreign>). Most authors hold,
however, that it can be merited de congruo.
This <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum</foreign>
is technically called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>meritum
de congruo fallibili</foreign>. Those
who deny that it can be merited at all, admit that it can be infallibly obtained
by fervent and unremitting prayer.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V. supra</hi>,
pp. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> sqq. The
student may also consult Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Instit.
Theol.</hi>, Vol. III, pp. 258 sqq.,
and Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De Iustific.</hi>, V, 22.</note>
</p>

<p>
β) It is impossible to answer with anything like certainty
the question whether the just man is able to merit
for himself in advance the grace of conversion against
the eventuality of a future lapse into mortal sin. Following
the lead of Albertus Magnus, St. Thomas takes a
negative view,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 114,
art. 7: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Respondeo dicendum quod
nullus potest sibi mereri reparationem
post lapsum futurum neque
merito condigni neque merito congrui.</foreign></q></note>
on the ground that mortal sin interrupts
the state of grace and annihilates all former merits. In
another passage of his writings, however, the Angelic
Doctor says: <q>There are two kinds of merit, one based
on justice, and this is called condign; and another based
solely upon mercy, and this is called congruous. Of the
latter St. Paul says that it is just, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> congruous, that a
man who has performed many good works should merit.... And
in this wise God does not forget our work and
<pb n='433'/><anchor id='Pg433'/>
love.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Lect. in Hebr.</hi>, III, 6, 10:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Duplex est meritum. Unum quod
innititur iustitiae et istud est meritum
condigni; aliud quod soli misericordiae
innititur, quod dicitur meritum
congrui. Et de isto dicit
[Paulus], quod iustum est, i.e. congruum,
quod homo, qui multa bona
fecit, mereatur.... Et isto modo
non obliviscitur Deus operis nostri et
dilectionis.</foreign></q></note> Scotus,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment.
in Sent.</hi>, IV, dist. 2,
qu. 1, art. 2.</note> Bonaventure,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Comment.
in Sent.</hi>, II, dist. 28,
dub. 2.</note> and Suarez<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, XII,
38, 6.</note> regard
this as <q>a pious and probable opinion,</q> well supported
by Holy Scripture. The prophet Jehu said to Josaphat,
King of Juda: <q>Thou helpest the ungodly, and thou art
joined in friendship with them that hate the Lord, and
therefore thou didst deserve indeed the wrath of the
Lord; but good works are found in thee.</q><note place='foot'>2 Paral. XIX, 2 sq.:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Impio
praebes auxilium et his, qui oderunt
Dominum, amicitiâ iungeris et idcirco
iram quidem Domini merebaris;
sed bona opera inventa sunt
in te.</foreign></q></note> To this
argument add the following consideration: If previous
mortal sin does not prevent those acts whereby man is
disposed for justification from being at least to a limited
extent meritorious, there is no reason to assume that
merits cancelled by subsequent mortal sin will not be imputed
to the sinner, with due regard, of course, to a certain
proportion between past merits and future sins.<note place='foot'>Suarez,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, XII, 38, 7:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Possunt enim praecedentia merita
esse tam pauca et tot peccata postea
multiplicata, ut omnino obruant
merita et efficiant, ut nullo modo
Deum ad misericordiam provocent;
secus vero erit, si e contrario merita
magna fuerint et peccatum subsequens
et rarum sit et excusationem
aliquam ex ignorantia vel infirmitate
habeat.</foreign></q></note>
To pray for the grace of conversion against the eventuality
of future mortal sin, is always good and useful,<note place='foot'>Ps. LXX, 9:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quum defecerit
virtus mea, ne derelinquas me.</foreign></q></note>
because it cannot but please God to know that we sincerely
desire to be restored to His friendship if we should
ever have the misfortune of losing it.<note place='foot'>Cfr.
St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa Theol.</hi>,
1a 2ae, qu. 114, art. 7, ad 1:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Desiderium, quo quis desiderat
reparationem post lapsum, iustum
dicitur; et similiter oratio, quâ petit
eiusmodi reparationem, dicitur iusta,
quia tendit ad iustitiam; non tamen
ita quod iustitiae innitatur per modum
meriti, sed solum misericordiae.</foreign></q>
Cfr. Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp.
687 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
γ) The just man may congruously merit for others
<pb n='434'/><anchor id='Pg434'/>
whatever he is able to merit for himself, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the grace
of conversion, final perseverance, and also the first
prevenient grace (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
prima praeveniens</foreign>), which no man in the state of
original sin is able to merit for himself.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>V.
supra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> sqq.</note>
The reason for this, according to St. Thomas,
is the intimate relation of friendship which sanctifying
grace establishes between the just man and God.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 114,
art. 6: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quia enim homo in gratia
constitutus implet Dei voluntatem,
congruum est secundum amicitiae
proportionem ut Deus impleat hominis
voluntatem in salvatione alterius,
licet quandoque possit habere
impedimentum ex parte illius, cuius
aliquis sanctus iustificationem desiderat.</foreign></q></note> However,
as Sylvius rightly observes, it is not in the power
of the just to obtain by this friendship favors which would
involve the abrogation of the divinely established order of
salvation. Such a favor would be, for example, the justification
of a sinner without the medium of grace, or
of a child without the agency of Baptism. An unreasonable
petition deserves no consideration, even if made by a
friend. What may be obtained by the merit of good
works may be even more effectively obtained by prayer
for others. The Apostle St. James teaches: <q>Pray for
one another that you may be saved; for the continual
prayer of a just man availeth much.</q><note place='foot'>Iac. V, 16:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Orate pro invicem,
ut salvemini; multum enim
valet deprecatio iusti assidua.</foreign></q></note> This consoling
truth is confirmed by the dogma of the Communion of Saints, by
many illustrious examples from the Bible<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>
Abraham, Job, St. Stephen.</note>
and ecclesiastical history,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>
St. Augustine and his
mother St. Monica.</note> and by the traditional practice
of the Church in praying God to give strength and perseverance
to the faithful and the grace of conversion to
the heathen and the sinner.<note place='foot'>Cfr. Suarez,
<hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>, XII, 38, 21.</note>
</p>

<pb n='435'/><anchor id='Pg435'/>

<p>
δ) A final question remains to be answered: Can the
just congruously merit such temporal blessings as good
health, a comfortable living, and success in business?
They can, but only in so far as these favors are conducive
to eternal salvation; for otherwise they would not be
graces. St. Thomas seems to go even further than this
by describing temporal favors as objects of condign
merit when they are conducive to salvation, and of congruous
merit when they bear no relation to that end.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theol.</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 114,
art. 10: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dicendum est quod, si
temporalia bona considerentur, prout
sunt utilia ad opera virtutum, quibus
perducimur in vitam aeternam, secundum
hoc directe et simpliciter
cadunt sub merito, sicut et augmentum
gratiae et omnia illa, quibus
homo adiuvatur ad perveniendum in
beatitudinem post primam gratiam....
Si autem considerentur huiusmodi
temporalia bona secundum se,
sic non sunt simpliciter bona hominis,
sed secundum quid, et ita non
simpliciter cadunt sub merito, sed
secundum quid, inquantum scil. homines
moventur a Deo ad aliqua temporaliter
agenda, quibus suum propositum
consequuntur Deo favente.</foreign></q></note>
We have no space left to enter into an argument on this
point, but in conclusion wish to call attention to two important
facts: first, that prayer is more effective than good
works in obtaining temporal as well as spiritual favors;
and secondly, that we should not strive with too much
anxiety for earthly goods, but direct our thoughts, desires,
prayers, and actions to God, the Infinite Good, who
has promised to be our <q>exceeding great reward.</q><note place='foot'>Gen. XV, 1:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ego ... merces
tua magna nimis.</foreign></q></note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Readings</hi>:&mdash;St. Thomas, <hi rend='italic'>Summa
Theologica</hi>, 1a 2ae, qu. 114, art. 1 sqq.&mdash;Billuart, <hi rend='italic'>De
Gratia</hi>, diss. 8, art. 1-5.&mdash;*Bellarmine, <hi rend='italic'>De
Iustificatione</hi>, V, 1-22.&mdash;*Suarez, <hi rend='italic'>Opusc. de Divina
Iustitia</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Idem</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia</hi>,
l. XII, cap. 1 sqq.&mdash;Oswald, <hi rend='italic'>Lehre von der Heiligung,
d. i. Gnade, Rechtfertigung, Gnodenwahl</hi>, § 7, 3rd ed.,
Paderborn 1885.&mdash;Tepe, <hi rend='italic'>Institutiones Theologicae</hi>, Vol. III,
pp. 223 sqq., Paris 1896.&mdash;*Heinrich-Gutberlet, <hi rend='italic'>Dogmatische
Theologie</hi>, Vol. VIII, § 473 sqq., Mainz 1897.&mdash;Chr. Pesch,
<hi rend='italic'>Praelectiones Dogmaticae</hi>, Vol. V, 3rd ed., pp. 215 sqq., Freiburg
1908.&mdash;*S.
<pb n='436'/><anchor id='Pg436'/>
Schiffini, <hi rend='italic'>De Gratia Divina</hi>, pp. 594 sqq., Freiburg
1901.&mdash;Kneib,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Lohnsucht der christlichen Moral</hi>, Vienna 1904.&mdash;I. J.
Remler, C. M., <hi rend='italic'>Supernatural Merit</hi>, St. Louis 1914.&mdash;A. Devine,
C. P., <hi rend='italic'>The Sacraments Explained</hi>, 3rd ed., London 1905, pp.
74-89.&mdash;L. Labauche, S. S., <hi rend='italic'>God and Man</hi>, pp. 254-270, N. Y.
1916. (On merit in general see M. Cronin, <hi rend='italic'>The Science of Ethics</hi>,
Vol. I, Dublin 1909, pp. 544 sqq.)&mdash;B. J. Otten, S. J., <hi rend='italic'>A Manual of
the History of Dogmas</hi>, Vol. II, St. Louis 1918, pp. 249 sqq.
</p>

<p>
On the Protestant idea of the fruits of justification see
Möhler, <hi rend='italic'>Symbolik</hi>, § 21 sqq. (English edition, pp. 157 sqq.).
</p>
</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='437'/><anchor id='Pg437'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index</head>

<lg>
<l>A</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acceptance of good works by God, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Actual Grace, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its nature, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its relation to habitual Grace, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Definition of, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its two-fold causality, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Division of, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Properties of, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Necessity of, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gratuity of, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Universality of, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its relation to free-will, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As a requisite of supernatural merit, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Actus humanus</foreign>, <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adoption, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adoptive sonship, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adults, all receive sufficient grace, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Affectus credulitatis</foreign>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albertus Magnus, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg432'>432</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander VIII, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander of Hales, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aloysius, St., <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alphonsus, St., <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alvarez, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambrose, St., <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Amor affectivus et effectivus</foreign>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amsdorf, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anabaptists, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aquaviva, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristotle, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnauld, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athanasius, St., <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attributes, Divine, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q><hi rend='italic'>Auctorem Fidei</hi>,</q> Bull, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustine, St., <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref>, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref>, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref>, <ref target='Pg424'>424</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg430'>430</ref>, <ref target='Pg431'>431</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustinianism, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>B</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baius and Bajanism, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg417'>417</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ballerini, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bañez, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptism, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref>, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref>, <ref target='Pg434'>434</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barnabas, Epistle of, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basil, St., <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beatitudes, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref>, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beauty, Supernatural, an effect of sanctifying grace, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Becanus, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='438'/><anchor id='Pg438'/>

<lg>
<l>Beghards, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beguins, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bellarmine, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg414'>414</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benedict XIV, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernard, St., <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berti, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beza, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biel, Gabriel, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Billuart, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bonaventure, St., <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg433'>433</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boniface II, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Book of Life, The, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Book of Torgau, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butzer, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>C</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cæsarius of Arles, St., <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cajetan, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calvin and Calvinism, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Camerarius, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cano, Melchior, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capacity for grace, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capacity of nature, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carthage, Councils of, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassian, John, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castelein, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catharinus, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Causality of Grace, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celestine I, St., <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celestius, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cercià, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Certainty regarding justification, <ref target='Pg379'>379</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charismata, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charity, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg417'>417</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Children, see <ref target='index-infants'>Infants</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christ, The Grace of, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrysostom, St., <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clement of Alexandria, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clement of Rome, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clement V, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clement VIII, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clement XI, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cogitatio congrua</foreign>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concupiscence, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Condignitas</foreign> (equality) between merit and reward, <ref target='Pg417'>417</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Condign Merit, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Congregatio de Auxiliis</hi>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congruism, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congruous Grace, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congruous Merit, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg430'>430</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conversion, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <ref target='Pg432'>432</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coöperating Grace, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyprian, St., <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyril of Alexandria, St., <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref>, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>D</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>D'Argentré, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Definition of Grace, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deharbe, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deification of man, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Delectatio victrix</foreign>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Lemos, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Lugo, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref>, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Despair, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De Vocatione Omnium Gentium</foreign>,</q> <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diospolis, Council of, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dordrecht, Synod of, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dorner, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Durandus, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eck, Johann, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Efficacious Grace, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Efficacy, Threefold, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elect, Number of the, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='439'/><anchor id='Pg439'/>

<lg>
<l>Ephesus, Ecumenical Council of, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ephrem, St., <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Estius, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eternal life, <ref target='Pg426'>426</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eucharist, The Holy, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>External and Internal Grace, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>F</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Facienti quod est in se Deus non denegat gratiam</foreign>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faith, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fides explicita&mdash;implicita</foreign>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fiduciary faith, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Filiatio adoptiva</foreign>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Final perseverance, see <ref target='index-perseverance'>Perseverance</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flacius, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Florence, Council of, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fonseca, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Francis de Sales, St., <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franzelin, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frassen, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-freedom'/>
<l>Freedom a requisite of merit, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Free-will, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How Grace coöperates with, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> sq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its relation to Grace, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Friendship, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Friendship of God, an effect of sanctifying grace, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fulgentius, St., <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>G</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gazzaniga, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gelasius, Pope, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gifts of the Holy Ghost, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glory, <ref target='Pg426'>426</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glossner, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God, The Grace of, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Godts, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gomarus, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gonet, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Good intention, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref>, <ref target='Pg414'>414</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Good works, Merit of, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gotti, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gottschalk, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goudin, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grace of justification, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Granderath, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia antecedens&mdash;concomitans</foreign>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia congrua&mdash;incongrua</foreign>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia efficax ab extrinseco sive per accidens</foreign>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia efficax ab intrinseco sive per se</foreign>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia est in nobis, sed sine nobis</foreign>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia gratis data</foreign>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia gratum faciens</foreign>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia inspirationis</foreign>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia magna</foreign>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia orationis</foreign>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia parva</foreign> (of Jansenius) <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia prima</foreign>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg424'>424</ref>, <ref target='Pg427'>427</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia sanans s. medicinalis</foreign>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia secunda</foreign>, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gratia vocans</foreign>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gratuity of Grace, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Graveson, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory of Nazianzus, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory the Great, St., <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grotius, Hugo, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gutberlet, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>H</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Habits, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Half-Melanchthonians,</q> <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harnack, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heathens, The, receive sufficient
<pb n='440'/><anchor id='Pg440'/>
grace for salvation, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henno, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henry of Ghent, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hilary, St., <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holy Ghost, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hope, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hurter, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hus, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hypostatic Union, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ignatius of Antioch, St., <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illuminating grace of the intellect, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Imputation, Lutheran theory of, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incarnation, Dogma of the, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incompatibility of Grace and sin, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Increase of glory, <ref target='Pg429'>429</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Increase of sanctifying grace, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg429'>429</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Indiculus,</q> <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-infants'/>
<l>Infants, Unbaptized, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> sqq.,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Baptized, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infralapsarians, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Inhabitatio Spiritus Sancti</foreign>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Innocent I, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Innocent X, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Innocent XI, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Intensio gratiae</foreign>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irenæus, St., <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaias, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>J</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacob and Esau, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James, St., <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref>, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref>, <ref target='Pg434'>434</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jansenius and Jansenism, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref>, <ref target='Pg417'>417</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jehu, <ref target='Pg433'>433</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerome, St., <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>, <ref target='Pg380'>380</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref>, <ref target='Pg412'>412</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jews, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John a S. Thoma, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John the Baptist, St., <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joseph, St., <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jovinian, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Julian of Eclanum, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justification, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Process of, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Necessity of faith for, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Necessity of other preparatory acts, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The state of, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The nature of, <ref target='Pg301'>301</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Negative element, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Positive element, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sanctifying Grace the sole formal cause of, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Qualities of, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Increase of Grace, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fruits of, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justin Martyr, St., <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>K</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Klee, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Κοινωνία θείας φύσεως, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Krogh-Tonning, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>L</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lateran, Fourth Council of the, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Law of grace, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lessius, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liberty, see <ref target='index-freedom'>Freedom</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liebermann, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Logos, The Divine, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Log-stick-and-stone theory, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucidus, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Lumen gloriae</foreign>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luther, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref>, <ref target='Pg302'>302</ref>, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>, <ref target='Pg399'>399</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='441'/><anchor id='Pg441'/>

<lg>
<l>M</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maldonatus, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mary, B. V., <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Massillon, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melanchthon, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mennonites, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mercy, Works of, <ref target='Pg416'>416</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merely sufficient Grace, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merit, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg430'>430</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Meritum de congruo</foreign>, <ref target='Pg430'>430</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Meritum naturae</foreign>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mezzofanti, Cardinal, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mileve, Council of, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Modernism, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molina and Molinism, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molinos, M. de, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moral virtues, Infused, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mortal sin, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>N</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nabuchodonosor, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natural and Supernatural Grace, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nature, Capacity of, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Necessitas antecedens peccati</foreign>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Necessitas medii&mdash;praecepti</foreign>, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>O</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obduracy, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Objects of merit, <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obstinacy, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Occasionalists, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ockam, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Opera steriliter bona</foreign>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orange, Second Council of, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Origen, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Original sin, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, <ref target='Pg434'>434</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orosius, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osiander, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osorius, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oswald, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>P</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palmieri, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pantheism, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Passaglia, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Passions, The, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul, St., <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref>, <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref>, <ref target='Pg402'>402</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref>, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref>, <ref target='Pg424'>424</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul V, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelagius and Pelagianism, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg308'>308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penance, Sacrament of, <ref target='Pg395'>395</ref>, <ref target='Pg428'>428</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perrone, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-perseverance'/>
<l>Perseverance, Final, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg425'>425</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg432'>432</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pesch, Chr., <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petavius, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peter Lombard, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peter, St., <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pfeffinger, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piccolomini, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pighius, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Πίστις, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pistoia, Council of, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pius V, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pius VI, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Platel, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plato, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pneumatomachians, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polycarp, St., <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pomponazzi, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Postlapsarians, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Potentia obedientialis</foreign>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Praeambula fidei</foreign>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='442'/><anchor id='Pg442'/>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Praemotio moralis</foreign>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Praemotio physica</foreign>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayer, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg431'>431</ref>, <ref target='Pg433'>433</ref>, <ref target='Pg435'>435</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Predestinarianism, Heretical, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Predestination, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ante praevisa nierita</foreign>, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>post praevisa merita</foreign>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Predestinationism, Orthodox, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prevenient Grace, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priesthood, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Properties of sanctifying Grace, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prosper, St., <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Protagoras, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Q</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Qualitates Fluentes, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Qualities, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quasi-Merit, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quesnel, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quietists, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>R</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Re-Creation, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Regeneration, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Repentance, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reprobation, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Requisites of supernatural merit, <ref target='Pg410'>410</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ripalda, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>, <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roman Catechism, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>S</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saints absolutely predestined, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Favored by God, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salmeron, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salutary acts, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanctification, Internal, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>, <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanctifying Grace, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Genesis of, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The sole formal cause of justification, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nature of, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A permanent quality of the soul, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>An infused habit, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Not identical with charity, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A participation of the soul in the divine nature, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The effects of, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sanctity, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Supernatural beauty, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Divine friendship, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Adoptive sonship, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Supernatural concomitants, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Properties of, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Admits of degrees and therefore can be increased, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lost by mortal sin, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fruits of, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As a requisite of merit, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref> sq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Increased by merit, <ref target='Pg424'>424</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanctity, an effect of sanctifying Grace, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sardagna, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scheeben, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schrader, <ref target='Pg375'>375</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Scientia media</foreign>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotus and the Scotists, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref>, <ref target='Pg433'>433</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Seed of God,</q> Why grace is called the, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Self-righteousness, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semipelagianism, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sensitive sphere, Graces of the, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinners, Ordinary and obdurate, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin, Incompatible with Grace, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Is sanctifying Grace diminished by venial sin? <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sins of malice, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Society of Jesus, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socinianism, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='443'/><anchor id='Pg443'/>

<lg>
<l>Socrates, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sola fides theory, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soto, Dominicus, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg430'>430</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stapleton, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stoics, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strengthening Grace of the will, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suarez, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref>, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref>, <ref target='Pg433'>433</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sufficient Grace, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supererogation, Works of, <ref target='Pg411'>411</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supernatural character of merit, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sylvius, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg434'>434</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syncretism, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synergist dispute, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>T</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temporal blessings, <ref target='Pg435'>435</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temptations, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tepe, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tertullian, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Θείωσις, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodoret, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theological systems devised to harmonize the dogmas of grace and free-will, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thomism, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Augustinianism, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Molinism, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Congruism, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Syncretism, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomas, St., <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref>, <ref target='Pg409'>409</ref>, <ref target='Pg414'>414</ref>, <ref target='Pg419'>419</ref>, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref>, <ref target='Pg431'>431</ref>, <ref target='Pg432'>432</ref>, <ref target='Pg435'>435</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomism and the Thomists, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>, <ref target='Pg413'>413</ref>, <ref target='Pg414'>414</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toletus, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tournely, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Traditionalism, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trent, Council of, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg385'>385</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref>, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref>, <ref target='Pg421'>421</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg423'>423</ref>, <ref target='Pg425'>425</ref>, <ref target='Pg426'>426</ref>, sqq., <ref target='Pg431'>431</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trinity, Dogma of the, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>U</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ultricuria, Nicholas de, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unbelief, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Unigenitus,</q> Constitution, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>V</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vasquez, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> sqq., <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg415'>415</ref>, <ref target='Pg418'>418</ref>, <ref target='Pg420'>420</ref>, <ref target='Pg425'>425</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vatican Council, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vega, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venial sin, Possibility of avoiding, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref> sqq.;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Is sanctifying Grace diminished by? <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref> sq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vienne, Council of, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vital acts of the soul, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitelleschi, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vocation, The grace of, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Voluntas salvifica Dei</foreign>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>W</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiclif, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Will to save, God's, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> sqq.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Y</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ysambert, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Z</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zosimus, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zwingli, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>.</l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
